Steve Jobs by Walter Isaacson

FROM THE AUTHOR OF THE BESTSELLING

BIOGRAPHIES OF BENJAMIN FRANKLIN

AND ALBERT EINSTEIN, THIS IS THE
EXCLUSIVE BIOGRAPHY OF STEVE JOBS.

Based on more than forty interviews with Jobs con
ducted over two years—as well as interviews with
more than a hundred family members, friends, adver
saries, competitors, and colleagues—Walter Isaacson
has written a riveting story of the roller-coaster life
and searingly intense personality of a creative entre
preneur whose passion for perfection and ferocious
driverevolutionized sixindustries: personal computers,
animated movies, music, phones, tablet computing,
and digital publishing.
At a time when America is seeking waysto sustain
its innovative edge, Jobsstands as the ultimate iconof
inventiveness and applied imagination. He knewthat
the bestwayto create value in the twenty-first century
was to connect creativity with technology. He built a
company where leaps of the imagination were com
binedwith remarkable feats of engineering.

Although Jobs cooperated withthisbook, heasked
for no control overwhat waswritten nor eventhe right
to read it before it was published. He put nothingoff-

limits. He encouraged the people he knew to speak
honestly. AndJobs speaks candidly, sometimes brutally
so, about the people he worked with and competed
against. His friends, foes, and colleagues provide an
unvarnished view ofthepassions, perfectionism, obses
sions, artistry, devilry, and compulsion forcontrol that
shaped his approach to business and the innovative
products that resulted.
Driven by demons, Jobs could drive those around
him to fury and despair. But his personality and prod
ucts were interrelated, just as Apple's hardware and
software tended to be, asif part ofan integrated system.
His tale is instructiveand cautionary, filled with lessons
about innovation, character, leadership, and values.

CHARACTERS

AlAlcorn. Chiefengineer at Atari, who designed Pong and hired Jobs.

Gil Amelio. Became CEO of Apple in 1996, bought NeXT, bringing Jobs
back.

BillAtkinson. Early Apple employee, developed graphics for the Macintosh.
Chrisann Brennan. Jobs s girlfriend at Homestead High, mother ofhis
daughter Lisa.

Lisa Brennan-Jobs. Daughter ofJobs and Chrisann Brennan, born in 1978;
became awriter inNew York City.

Nolan Bushnell. Founder ofAtari and entrepreneurial role model for Jobs.
BillCampbell. Apple marketing chief during Jobs's first stint at Apple and
board member and confidant after Jobs's return in 1997.

Edwin Catmull. Acofounder ofPixar and later aDisney executive.
Kobun Chino. ASoto Zen master in California who became Jobs's spiritual
teacher.

Lee Clow. Advertising wizard who created Apple's "1984" ad and worked with
Jobs for three decades.

Deborah "Debi" Coleman. Early Mac team manager who took over Apple
manufacturing.

Tim Cook. Steady, calm, chiefoperating officer hired byJobs in 1998; replaced
Jobs as Apple CEO in August 2011.

Eddy Cue. ChiefofInternet services at Apple,Jobs's wingman in dealing with
content companies.

Andrea"Andy" Cunningham. Publicist atRegis McKenna's firm who han
dled Apple in the early Macintosh years.

xiv

Characters

Michael Eisner. Hard-driving Disney CEO who made the Pixar deal, then
clashed with Jobs.

Larry Ellison. CEO of Oracle and personal friend ofJobs.

Tony Fadell. Punky engineer brought to Apple in 2001 to develop the iPod.
Scott Forstall. Chiefof Apple's mobile device software.
Robert Friedland. Reed student, proprietor of an apple farm commune,

and spiritual seeker who influenced Jobs, then went on to run amining
company.

Jean-Louis Gassee. Apple's manager in France, took over the Macintosh
division whenJobs was ousted in 1985.

Bill Gates. The other computer wunderkind born in 1955.

Andy Hertzfeld. Playful, friendly software engineer and Jobs's pal on the
original Mac team.

Joanna Hoffman. Original Mac team memberwith the spirit to stand up toJobs.
Elizabeth Holmes. Daniel Kottke's girlfriend at Reed and early Apple
employee.

Rod Holt. Chain-smoking Marxist hired by Jobs in 1976 tobe the electrical
engineer on the Apple II.
Robert Iger. Succeeded Eisner as Disney CEO in 2005.

Jonathan "Jony" Ive. Chief designer at Apple, became Jobs's partner and
confidant.

Abdulfattah "John" Jandali. Syrian-born graduate student inWisconsin

who became biological father ofJobs and Mona Simpson, later afood and
beverage manager at the Boomtown casino near Reno.
Clara Hagopian Jobs. Daughter of Armenian immigrants, married Paul
Jobs in1946; they adopted Steve soon after his birth in1955.
ErinJobs. Middle child ofLaurene Powell and Steve Jobs.
EveJobs. Youngest child of Laurene and Steve.

Patty Jobs. Adopted by Paul and Clara Jobs two years after they adopted
Steve.

Paul ReinholdJobs. Wisconsin-born Coast Guard seaman who, with his
wife, Clara, adopted Steve in 1955.

ReedJobs. Oldest child of Steve Jobs and Laurene Powell.
RonJohnson. Hired byJobs in2000 todevelop Apple's stores.

Jeffrey Katzenberg. Head ofDisney Studios, clashed with Eisner and re
signed in1994 to cofound DreamWorks SKG.

Characters

xv

Daniel Kottke. Jobs's closest friend at Reed, fellow pilgrim to India, early
Appleemployee.
John Lasseter. Cofounderand creative force at Pixar.

Dan'lLewin. Marketing exec with Jobs atApple and then NeXT.

Mike Markkula. First big Apple investor and chairman, a father figure to
Jobs.

Regis McKenna. Publicity whiz who guided Jobs early on and remained a
trusted advisor.

Mike Murray.Early Macintosh marketing director.

Paul Otellini. CEO ofIntel who helped switch the Macintosh to Intel chips
but did not get the iPhone business.

Laurene Powell. Savvy and good-humored Penn graduate, went to Gold
man Sachs and then Stanford Business School, married Steve Jobs in1991.
George Riley. Jobs's Memphis-born friend and lawyer.
Arthur Rock. Legendary tech investor, early Apple board member, Jobs's
father figure.

Jonathan "Ruby" Rubinstein. Worked with Jobs at NeXT, became chief
hardware engineer at Apple in 1997.

Mike Scott. Brought in by Markkula to be Apple's president in 1977 to try
to manageJobs.

John Sculley. Pepsi executive recruited by Jobs in 1983 to be Apple's CEO,
clashed with and oustedJobs in 1985.

Joanne Schieble Jandali Simpson. Wisconsin-born biological mother of
Steve Jobs, whom she put up for adoption, and Mona Simpson, whom she
raised.

Mona Simpson. Biological full sister ofJobs; they discovered their relationship
in 1986 and became close. She wrote novels loosely based on her mother

Joanne {Anywhere but Here), Jobs and his daughter Lisa {A Regular Guy),
and her father Abdulfattah Jandali {The Lost Father).
AlvyRay Smith. A cofounder ofPixar who clashed with Jobs.

Burrell Smith. Brilliant, troubled programmer on the original Mac team,
afflicted withschizophrenia in the 1990s.

Avadis "Avie" Tevanian. Worked withJobs and Rubinstein atNeXT, became
chiefsoftware engineer atApple in 1997.

James Vincent. Amusic-loving Brit, the younger partner with Lee Clow and
Duncan Milner atthe ad agency Apple hired.

xvi

Characters

RonWayne. Met Jobs at Atari, became first partner with Jobs and Wozniak at
fledgling Apple, but unwisely decided to forgo his equity stake.
Stephen Wozniak. The star electronics geek at Homestead High; Jobs fig
ured out how to package and market his amazing circuit boards and be
came his partner in founding Apple.

INTRODUCTION
How This Book Came to Be

In the early summer of2004,1 got a phone call from Steve Jobs. He
had been scattershot friendly to me over the years, with occasional

bursts ofintensity, especially when he was launching a new product
that he wanted on the cover ofTime or featured on CNN, places where
I'd worked. But now that I was no longer at either ofthose places, I
hadn't heard from him much. We talked abit about the Aspen Insti
tute, which I had recently joined, and I invited him to speak at our
summer campus in Colorado. He'd behappy to come, he said, but not
to be onstage. He wanted insteadto take a walkso that we could talk.

That seemed a bit odd. I didn't yet know that taking a long walk
was his preferred way to have a serious conversation. It turnedout that

he wanted me to write a biography ofhim. I had recently published
one onBenjamin Franklin and was writing one about Albert Einstein,
and my initial reaction was to wonder, half jokingly, whether he saw
himself as the natural successor in that sequence. Because I assumed

that he was still in the middle of an oscillating career that had many
more ups and downs left, I demurred. Not now, I said. Maybe ina de
cade or two, when you retire.
I had known him since 1984, when he came to Manhattan to have

lunch with Times editors and extol his new Macintosh. He was petu
lant even then, attacking a Time correspondent for having wounded
him with a story that was too revealing. But talking to him afterward,
I found myselfrather captivated, as so many others have been over the
years, by his engaging intensity. We stayed in touch, even after hewas

Introduction

ousted from Apple. When he had something to pitch, such as aNeXT
computer or Pixar movie, the beam ofhis charm would suddenly refocus on me, and he would take me to a sushi restaurant in Lower
Manhattanto tell me that whatever he was toutingwas the best thing
he had ever produced. I liked him.
When he was restored to the throne at Apple, we put him on the

cover of Time, and soon thereafter hebegan offering me his ideas for a

series we were doing on the most influential people ofthe century. He
hadlaunched his "Think Different" campaign, featuring iconic photos

of some of the same people we were considering, and he found the
endeavor of assessing historic influence fascinating.

After I had deflected his suggestion that I write abiography ofhim,
I heard from him every now and then. At one point I emailed to ask
ifit was true, as my daughter had told me, that the Apple logo was an
homage to Alan Turing, the British computer pioneer who broke the
German wartime codes and then committed suicide by biting into a

cyanide-laced apple. He replied that he wished he had thought ofthat,
but hadn't. That started anexchange about the early history ofApple,
and I found myself gathering string on the subject, just in case I ever
decided to do such a book. When my Einstein biography came out,
he came to a bookevent in Palo Alto and pulled me aside to suggest,

again, that he would make a good subject.
His persistence baffled me. He was known to guard his privacy,
and I had no reason to believe he'd ever read anyof mybooks. Maybe

someday, I continued to say. But in 2009 his wife, Laurene Powell, said
bluntly, "Ifyou're ever going to do abook on Steve, you'd better do it
now." He had just taken asecond medical leave. I confessed to her that
when he had first raised the idea, I hadn't known he was sick. Almost

nobody knew, she said. He had called me right before he was going
to be operated on for cancer, and he was still keeping it a secret, she
explained.
I decided then to write this book. Jobs surprised me by readily ac

knowledging that he would have no control over itor even the right to
see it in advance. "It's your book," he said. "I won't even read it." But
later that fall he seemed to have second thoughts about cooperating

and, though I didn't know it, was hitby another round ofcancer com-

Introduction

plications. He stopped returning my calls, and I put the project aside
for a while.

Then, unexpectedly, he phoned me late on the afternoon of New

Year's Eve 2009. He was at home in Palo Alto with only his sister, the
writer Mona Simpson. His wife and their three children had taken a

quick trip to go skiing, but he was not healthy enough to join them.
He was in a reflective mood, andwe talked for more than an hour. He

began by recalling that he had wanted to build a frequency counter
when he was twelve, and he was able to look up Bill Hewlett, the
founder ofHP, in the phone book and call him to get parts. Jobs said
that the past twelve years ofhis life, since his return to Apple, had been
his most productive in terms ofcreating new products. But his more
important goal, he said, was to do what Hewlett and his friend David

Packard had done, which was create a company that was so imbued
with innovative creativity that it would outlive them.

"I always thought ofmyself as a humanities person as a kid, but

I liked electronics," he said. "Then I read something that one of my
heroes, Edwin Land of Polaroid, said about the importance of people
who could stand at the intersection ofhumanities and sciences, and

I decided that's what I wanted to do." It was as ifhe were suggest
ing themes for his biography (and in this instance, atleast, the theme
turned out to be valid). The creativity that can occur when a feel for

both the humanities and the sciences combine in one strong personal
ity was the topic that most interested me in my biographies ofFranklin
and Einstein, and I believe that itwill be akey to creating innovative
economies in the twenty-first century.

I askedJobs why he wanted me to be the one to write his biography.
"I think you're good at getting people to talk," he replied. That was an
unexpected answer. I knew that I would have to interview scores of

people he had fired, abused, abandoned, or otherwise infuriated, and

I feared he would not be comfortable with my getting them to talk.
Andindeed he did turn out to be skittish when word trickled back to

him ofpeople that I was interviewing. But after a couple ofmonths,
he began encouraging people to talk to me, even foes and former girl
friends. Nor did he try to put anything off-limits. "I've done a lot of

things I'm not proud of, such as getting my girlfriend pregnant when

Introduction

I was twenty-three and the way I handled that," he said. "But I don't
have any skeletons in my closet that can't be allowed out." He didn't
seek any control over what I wrote, or even ask to read it in advance.
His only involvement came when my publisher was choosing the cover
art. When he saw an early version of a proposed cover treatment, he
disliked it so muchthat he asked to have input in designing a newver
sion. I was both amused andwilling, soI readily assented.

I ended up having more than forty interviews and conversations
with him. Some were formal ones in his Palo Alto living room, oth

ers were done during long walks and drives or by telephone. During

my two years ofvisits, he became increasingly intimate and revealing,
though at times I witnessed what his veteran colleagues at Apple used
to call his "reality distortion field." Sometimes it was the inadvertent

misfiring ofmemory cells that happens to us all; at other times he
was spinning his own version of reality both to me and to himself.
To check and flesh out his story, I interviewed more than a hundred
friends, relatives, competitors, adversaries, and colleagues.
His wife also did not request any restrictions or control, nor did
she ask to see in advance what I would publish. In fact she strongly

encouraged me to be honest about his failings as well as his strengths.
She is one of the smartest and most grounded people I have ever met.

"There are parts ofhis life and personality that are extremely messy,
and that's the truth," she told me early on. "You shouldn't whitewash

it. He's good at spin, but he also has aremarkable story, and I'd like to
seethat it's all told truthfully."
I leave it to the reader to assess whether I have succeeded in this

mission. I'm sure there are players in this drama who will remember
some of the events differently or think that I sometimes got trapped
in Jobs's distortion field. As happened when I wrote a book about

Henry Kissinger, which in some ways was good preparation for this
project, I found that people had such strong positive and negative
emotions about Jobs that the Rashomon effect was often evident. But
I've done the best I can to balance conflicting accounts fairly and be
transparent about the sources I used.
This is a book about the roller-coaster life and searingly intense

personality ofacreative entrepreneur whose passion for perfection and

Introduction

xxi

ferocious drive revolutionized six industries: personal computers, ani
mated movies, music, phones, tablet computing, and digital publishing.
You might even add aseventh, retail stores, which Jobs did not quite
revolutionize but did reimagine. In addition, he opened the way for
a new market for digital content based on apps rather than just web
sites. Along the way he produced not only transforming products but
also, on his second try, a lasting company, endowed with his DNA,
that is filled with creative designers and daredevil engineers who could
carry forward his vision. In August 2011, right before he stepped down
as CEO, the enterprise he started in his parents' garage became the
world's most valuable company.
This is also, I hope, a book about innovation. At a time when the

United States is seeking ways to sustain its innovative edge, and when
societies around the world are trying to build creative digital-age econ
omies, Jobs stands as the ultimate icon ofinventiveness, imagination,
and sustained innovation. He knew that the best way to create value in
the twenty-first century was to connect creativity with technology, so
he built acompanywhere leaps ofthe imagination were combined with

remarkable feats of engineering. He and his colleagues at Apple were
able to think differently: They developed not merely modest product
advances based on focus groups, but whole new devices and services
that consumers did not yet know they needed.

He was not amodel boss or human being, tidily packaged for emu

lation. Driven by demons, he could drive those around him to fury and
despair. But his personality and passions and products were all inter

related, just as Apple's hardware and software tended to be, as ifpart of
an integrated system. His tale is thus both instructive and cautionary,
filled with lessons about innovation, character, leadership, and values.
Shakespeare's Henry V—the story ofawillful and immature prince
who becomes a passionate but sensitive, callous but sentimental, in
spiring butflawed king—begins with the exhortation "Ofor aMuse of

fire, that would ascend / The brightest heaven ofinvention." For Steve

Jobs,,the ascent to the brightest heaven ofinvention begins with atale
oftwo sets ofparents, and ofgrowing up in avalley that was just learn
inghow to turn silicon into gold.

STEVE JOBS

The Los Altos house withthe garage where
Apple was born
PaulJobs with Steve, 1956

In the HomesteadHighyearbook, 1972

With the "SWABJOB"schoolprank sign

chapter

one

CHILDHOOD
Abandoned and Chosen

TheAdoption
When Paul Jobs was mustered out of the Coast Guard after World

War II, he made awager with his crewmates. They had arrived in San
Francisco, where their ship was decommissioned, and Paul betthathe
would find himself a wife within two weeks. He was a taut, tattooed

engine mechanic, six feet tall, with a passing resemblance to James

Dean. But itwasn't his looks that got him adate with Clara Hagopian,
a sweet-humored daughter ofArmenian immigrants. It was the fact

that he and his friends had acar, unlike the group she had originally
planned to go out with that evening. Ten days later, in March 1946,
Paul got engaged to Clara and won his wager. It would turn out to be
a happy marriage, one that lasted until death parted them more than
forty yearslater.

Paul Reinhold Jobs had been raised on a dairy farm in Germantown, Wisconsin. Even though his father was an alcoholic and some

times abusive, Paul ended up with agentle and calm disposition under
his leathery exterior. After dropping out ofhigh school, he wandered

through the Midwest picking up work as amechanic until, at age nine
teen, he joined the Coast Guard, even though he didn't know how

Walter Isaacson

to swim. He was deployed on the USS GeneralM. C. Meigs and spent
much ofthe war ferrying troops to Italy for General Patton. His talent
as a machinist and fireman earned him commendations, but he occa

sionally found himselfin minor trouble and never rose above the rank
of seaman.

Clara was born in New Jersey, where her parents had landed after

fleeing the Turks in Armenia, and they moved to the Mission District
of SanFrancisco when she was a child. She had a secret that sherarely

mentioned to anyone: She had been married before, but her husband
had been killed in the war. So when she met Paul Jobs on that first
date, she was primed to start a new life.

Like many who lived through the war, they had experienced
enough excitement that, when itwas over, they desired simply to settle
down, raise afamily, and lead aless eventful life. They had little money,

so they moved to Wisconsin and lived with Paul's parents for a few
years, then headed for Indiana, where he got ajob as amachinist for
International Harvester. His passion was tinkering with old cars, and
he made money in his spare time buying, restoring, and selling them.

Eventually he quit his day job to become afull-time used car salesman.
Clara, however, loved San Francisco, and in 1952 she convinced
her husband to move back there. They got anapartment in the Sunset

District facing the Pacific, just south ofGolden Gate Park, and he took
ajob working for afinance company as a"repo man," picking the locks
of cars whose owners hadn't paid their loans and repossessing them.

He also bought, repaired, and sold some ofthe cars, making a decent
enough living in the process.

There was, however, something missing intheir lives. They wanted
children, but Clara had suffered an ectopic pregnancy, in which the
fertilized egg was implanted in afallopian tube rather than the uterus,
and she had been unable to have any. So by 1955, after nine years of
marriage, they were looking to adopt a child.

Like Paul Jobs, Joanne Schieble was from a rural Wisconsin family
ofGerman heritage. Her father, Arthur Schieble, had immigrated to
the outskirts ofGreen Bay, where he and his wife owned a mink farm
and dabbled successfiilly in various other businesses, including real

Childhood

estate and photoengraving. He was very strict, especially regarding his
daughter's relationships, and he had strongly disapproved ofher first
love, an artist who was not aCatholic. Thus itwas no surprise that he
threatened to cutJoanne offcompletely when, as agraduate student at
the University ofWisconsin, she fell in love with Abdulfattah "John"
Jandali, aMuslim teaching assistant from Syria.

Jandali was the youngest ofnine children in a prominent Syrian
family. His father owned oil refineries and multiple other businesses,
with large holdings in Damascus and Horns, and at one point pretty
much controlled the price ofwheat in the region. His mother, he later
said, was a"traditional Muslim woman" who was a"conservative, obe

dient housewife." Like the Schieble family, the Jandalis put apremium
on education. Abdulfattah was sent to aJesuit boarding school, even
though he was Muslim, and he got an undergraduate degree at the
American University in Beirut before entering the University ofWis
consin to pursue a doctoral degree in political science.

In the summer of1954, Joanne went with Abdulfattah to Syria.
They spent two months in Horns, where she learned from his family
to cook Syrian dishes. When they returned to Wisconsin she discov

ered that she was pregnant. They were both twenty-three, but they
decided not to get married. Her father was dying at the time, and he
had threatened to disown her if she wed Abdulfattah. Nor was abor

tion an easy option in a small Catholic community. So in early 1955,
Joanne traveled to San Francisco, where shewas taken into the care of

a kindly doctor who sheltered unwed mothers, delivered their babies,
and quietly arranged closed adoptions.

Joanne had one requirement: Her child must be adopted by college
graduates. So the doctor arranged for the baby to be placed with alaw
yer and his wife. But when a boy was born—on February 24,1955—
the designated couple decided that they wanted agirl and backed out.

Thus itwas that the boy became the son not of alawyer but of ahigh
school dropout with a passion for mechanics and his salt-of-the-earth
wife who was working as a bookkeeper. Paul and Clara named their
new baby StevenPaulJobs.

When Joanne found out that her baby had been placed with a cou

ple who had not even graduated from high school, she refused to sign

Walter Isaacson

the adoption papers. The standoff lasted weeks, even after the baby
had settled into the Jobs household. Eventually Joanne relented, with

the stipulation that the couple promise—indeed sign a pledge—to
fund a savings account to pay for the boy's college education.
There was another reason that Joanne was balky about signing

the adoption papers. Her father was about to die, and she planned to
marryJandali soon after. She held out hope, she would later tell family
members, sometimes tearing up at the memory, that once they were
married, she could gettheir baby boy back.
Arthur Schieble died in August 1955, after the adoption was fi

nalized. Just after Christmas that year, Joanne and Abdulfattah were
married in St. Philip the Apostle Catholic Church in Green Bay. He

got his PhD in international politics the next year, and then they had
another child, a girl named Mona. After she and Jandali divorced
in 1962, Joanne embarked on a dreamy and peripatetic life that her
daughter, who grew up to become the acclaimed novelist Mona Simp
son, would capture in her book Anywhere but Here. Because Steve's
adoption had been closed, itwould be twenty years before they would
all find each other.

Steve Jobs knew from an early age that he was adopted; "My parents
were very open with me about that," he recalled. He had avivid memory

ofsitting on the lawn ofhis house, when he was six or seven years old,
telling the girl who lived across the street. "So does that mean your real
parents didn't want you?" the girl asked. "Lightning bolts went offin my
head," according to Jobs. "Iremember running into the house, crying.
And my parents said, 'No, you have to understand.' They were very
serious and looked me straight in the eye. They said, 'We specifically

picked you out.' Both ofmy parents said that and repeated itslowly for
me. And they put an emphasis on every word in that sentence."
Abandoned. Chosen. Special. Those concepts became part ofwho
Jobs was and how he regarded himself. His closest friends think that
the knowledge that he was given up atbirth left some scars. "I think his
desire for complete control ofwhatever he makes derives directly from

his personality and the fact that he was abandoned at birth," said one
longtime colleague, Del Yocam. "He wants to control his environment,

Childhood

and he sees the product as an extension ofhimself." Greg Calhoun,
who became close to Jobs right after college, saw another effect. "Steve
talked to me alot about being abandoned and the pain that caused,"
hesaid. "Itmade him independent. He followed the beat ofa different
drummer, and that came from being in a different world than he was
born into."

Later in life, when he was the same age his biological father had
been when he abandoned him, Jobs would father and abandon a child

ofhis own. (He eventually took responsibility for her.) Chrisann Bren

nan, the mother of that child, said that being put up for adoption left
Jobs "full ofbroken glass," and it helps to explain some ofhis behav
ior. "He who is abandoned is an abandoner," she said. Andy Hertzfeld, who worked with Jobs at Apple in the early 1980s, is among the
few who remained close to both Brennan and Jobs. "The key question
about Steve is why he can't control himself at times from being so reflexively cruel and harmful to some people," he said. "That goes back to
being abandoned at birth. The real underlying problem was the theme
of abandonment in Steves life."

Jobs dismissed this. "There's some notion that because I was aban

doned, I worked very hard so I could do well and make my parents
wish they had me back, or some such nonsense, but that's ridiculous,"
he insisted. "Knowing I was adopted may have made me feel more in

dependent, but Ihave never felt abandoned. I've always felt special. My
parents made me feel special." He would later bristle whenever anyone
referred to Paul and ClaraJobs as his "adoptive" parents or implied that
they were not his "real" parents. "They were my parents 1,000%," he
said. When speaking about his biological parents, on the other hand,
he was curt: "They were my sperm and egg bank. That's not harsh, it's
just the way itwas, asperm bank thing, nothing more."
Silicon Valley

The childhood that Paul and ClaraJobs created for their new son was,
in many ways, astereotype ofthe late 1950s. When Steve was two they
adopted agirl they named Patty, and three years later they moved to a

Walter Isaacson

tract house in the suburbs. The finance company where Paul worked

as arepo man, CIT, had transferred him down to its Palo Alto office,
but he could not afford to live there, so they landed in a subdivision in

Mountain View, aless expensive town just to the south.
There Paul tried to pass along his love ofmechanics and cars. "Steve,

this is your workbench now," he said as he marked off asection of the
table in their garage. Jobs remembered being impressed by his father's
focus on craftsmanship. "Ithought my dad's sense ofdesign was pretty

good," he said, "because he knew how to build anything. Ifwe needed
a cabinet, he would build it.When he built our fence, he gave me a
hammer so I could work with him."

Fifty years later the fence still surrounds the back and side yards
of the house in Mountain View. AsJobs showed it off to me, he ca

ressed the stockade panels and recalled a lesson that his father im

planted deeply in him. It was important, his father said, to craft the
backs ofcabinets and fences properly, even though they were hidden.
"He loved doing things right. He even cared about the look ofthe parts
you couldn't see."
His father continued to refurbish and resell used cars, and he fes

tooned the garage with pictures ofhis favorites. He would point out
the detailing ofthe design to his son: the lines, the vents, the chrome,
the trim of the seats. After work each day, he would change into his

dungarees and retreat to the garage, often with Steve tagging along.
"I figured I could get him nailed down with alittle mechanical ability,
but he really wasn't interested in getting his hands dirty," Paul later
recalled. "He never really cared too much about mechanical things."
"I wasn't that into fixing cars," Jobs admitted. "But I was eager to

hang out with my dad." Even as he was growing more aware that he
had been adopted, he was becoming more attached to his father. One
day when he was about eight, he discovered aphotograph of his fa
ther from his time in the Coast Guard. "He's in the engine room, and

he's got his shirt off and looks like James Dean. It was one of those
Oh wow moments for a kid. Wow, oooh, my parents were actually once
very young and really good-looking."

Through cars, his father gave Steve his first exposure to electronics.

"My dad did not have a deep understanding of electronics, but he'd

Childhood

encountered it a lot in automobiles and other things hewould fix. He

showed me the rudiments ofelectronics, and I got very interested in
that." Even more interesting were the trips to scavenge for parts. "Every
weekend, there'd be ajunkyard trip. We'd be looking for a generator,
a carburetor, all sorts ofcomponents." He remembered watching his
father negotiate at the counter. "He was agood bargainer, because he
knew better than the guys at the counter what the parts should cost."

This helped fulfill the pledge his parents made when he was adopted.
"My college fund came from my dad paying $50 for a Ford Falcon or
some other beat-up car that didn't run, working on it for a few weeks,
and selling it for $250—and not telling the IRS."
The Jobses' house and the others in their neighborhood were built

by the real estate developer Joseph Eichler, whose company spawned
more than eleven thousand homes in various California subdivisions

between 1950 and 1974. Inspired by Frank Lloyd Wright's vision of
simple modern homes for the American "everyman," Eichler built in
expensive houses that featured floor-to-ceiling glass walls, open floor
plans, exposed post-and-beam construction, concrete slab floors, and
lots ofsliding glass doors. "Eichler did agreat thing,"Jobs said on one
of our walks around the neighborhood. "His houses were smart and

cheap and good. They brought clean design and simple taste to lowerincome people. They had awesome little features, like radiant heating
in the floors. You put carpet on them, and we had nice toasty floors
when we were kids."

Jobs said that his appreciation for Eichler homes instilled in him

a passion for making nicely designed products for the mass market.

"I love it when you can bring really great design and simple capabil
ity to something that doesn't cost much," he said as he pointed out
the clean elegance of the houses. "It was the original vision for Apple.
That's what we tried to do with the first Mac. That's what we did with
the iPod."

Across the street from the Jobs family lived aman who had become
successful as areal estate agent. "He wasn't that bright," Jobs recalled,

"but he seemed to be making afortune. So my dad thought, 'I can do
that.' He worked so hard, I remember. He took these night classes,
passed thelicense test, and gotinto real estate. Thenthebottom fell out

Walter Isaacson

ofthe market." As a result, thefamily found itself financially strapped

for a year or so while Steve was in elementary school. His mother
took ajob as abookkeeper for Varian Associates, acompany that made
scientific instruments, and they took outa second mortgage. One day

his fourth-grade teacher asked him, "What is ityou don't understand
about the universe?" Jobs replied, "Idon't understand why all ofa sud

den my dad is so broke." He was proud that his father never adopted a
servile attitude orslick style that may have made him abetter salesman.
"You had to suck up to people to sell real estate, and he wasn't good at
that and it wasn't in his nature. I admired him for that." PaulJobswent
back to being a mechanic.

His father was calm and gentle, traits that his son later praised more
than emulated. He was also resolute. Jobs described one example:

Nearby was an engineer who was working at Westinghouse. He was
a single guy, beatnik type. He had a girlfriend. She would babysit me
sometimes. Both my parents worked, so I would come here right after
school for acouple ofhours. He would get drunk and hit her a couple
oftimes. She came over one night, scared out ofher wits, and he came

over drunk, and my dad stood him down—saying "She's here, but you're
not coming in." He stood right there. We like to think everything was

idyllic in the 1950s, but this guy was one of those engineers who had
messed-up lives.

What made the neighborhood different from the thousands of

other spindly-tree subdivisions across America was that even the
ne'er-do-wells tended to be engineers. "When we moved here, there

were apricot and plum orchards on all of these corners," Jobs recalled.
"But it was beginning to boom because of military investment." He
soaked up the history of the valley and developed ayearning to play
his own role. Edwin Land ofPolaroid later told him about being asked

by Eisenhower to help build the U-2 spy plane cameras to see how real
the Soviet threat was. Thefilm was dropped in canisters and returned
to the NASA Ames Research Center in Sunnyvale, not far from where

Jobs lived. "The first computer terminal I ever saw was when my dad
brought me to the Ames Center," he said. "I fell totally in love with it."

Childhood

Other defense contractors sprouted nearby during the 1950s.
The Lockheed Missiles and Space Division, which built submarinelaunched ballistic missiles, was founded in 1956 next to the NASA

Center; by the time Jobs moved to the area four years later, itemployed
twenty thousand people. A few hundred yards away, Westinghouse
built facilities that produced tubes and electrical transformers for the

missile systems. "You had all these military companies on the cutting
edge," he recalled. "It was mysterious and high-tech and made living
here very exciting."

In the wake ofthe defense industries there arose abooming econ
omy based on technology. Its roots stretched back to 1938, when
David Packard and his new wife moved into a house in Palo Alto
that had a shed where his friend Bill Hewlett was soon ensconced.

The house had a garage—an appendage that would prove both use
ful and iconic in the valley—in which they tinkered around until they
had their first product, an audio oscillator. By the 1950s, HewlettPackard was afast-growing company making technical instruments.
Fortunately there was a place nearby for entrepreneurs who had
outgrown their garages. In a move that would help transform the area

into the cradle ofthe tech revolution, Stanford University's dean ofen
gineering, Frederick Terman, created a seven-hundred-acre industrial

park on university land for private companies that could commercial
ize the ideas of his students. Its first tenant was Varian Associates,

where Clara Jobs worked. "Terman came up with this great idea that
did more than anything to cause the tech industry to grow up here,"
Jobs said. By the time Jobs was ten, HP had nine thousand employees
and was the blue-chip company where every engineer seeking financial
stability wanted to work.

The most important technology for the region's growth was, of
course, the semiconductor. William Shockley, who had been one of

the inventors ofthe transistor at Bell Labs in New Jersey, moved out
to Mountain View and, in 1956, started a company to build tran
sistors using silicon rather than the more expensive germanium that
was then commonly used. But Shockley became increasingly erratic
and abandoned his silicon transistor project, which led eight ofhis
engineers—most notably Robert Noyce and Gordon Moore—to

10

Walter Isaacson

break away to form Fairchild Semiconductor. That company grew to
twelve thousand employees, but it fragmented in 1968, when Noyce

lost a power struggle to become CEO. He took Gordon Moore and
founded a company that they called Integrated Electronics Corpora
tion, which they soon smartly abbreviated to Intel. Their third em
ployee was Andrew Grove, who later would grow the company by
shifting its focus from memory chips to microprocessors. Within a
few years there would be more than fifty companies inthe area making
semiconductors.

The exponential growth of this industry was correlated with the
phenomenon famously discovered by Moore, who in 1965 drew a
graph ofthe speed ofintegrated circuits, based on the number oftran
sistors that could be placed on achip, and showed that it doubled about
every two years, a trajectory that could be expected to continue. This
was reaffirmed in 1971, when Intelwas able to etcha complete central

processing unit onto one chip, the Intel 4004, which was dubbed a
"microprocessor." Moore's Law has held generally true to this day, and
its reliable projection ofperformance to price allowed two generations
ofyoung entrepreneurs, including Steve Jobs and Bill Gates, to create
cost projections for their forward-leaning products.
The chip industry gave the region anew name when Don Hoefler,
a columnist for theweekly trade paper Electronic News, began a series

in January 1971 entitled "Silicon Valley USA." The forty-mile Santa
Clara Valley, which stretches from South San Francisco through Palo
Alto to San Jose, has as its commercial backbone El Camino Real,

the royal road that once connected California's twenty-one mission
churches and is now a bustling avenue that connects companies and
startups accounting for athird ofthe venture capital investment in the
United States each year. "Growing up, I got inspired by the history of
the place,"Jobs said. "That made me want to be apart ofit."
Like most kids, hebecame infused with the passions ofthe grown

ups around him. "Most ofthe dads in the neighborhood did really neat
stuff, like photovoltaics and batteries and radar," Jobs recalled. "I grew
up in awe ofthat stuffand asking people about it."The most important
ofthese neighbors, Larry Lang, lived seven doors away. "He was my
model ofwhat an HP engineer was supposed to be: a big ham radio

Childhood

11

operator, hard-core electronics guy,"Jobs recalled. "He would bring me
stuffto play with." As we walked up to Lang's old house, Jobs pointed
to the driveway. "He took a carbon microphone and a battery and a
speaker, and heputit onthis driveway. He had me talk into thecarbon

mike and it amplified out ofthe speaker."Jobs had been taught by his
father that microphones always required an electronic amplifier. "So
I raced home, and I told my dad that he was wrong."
"No, it needs an amplifier," his father assured him. When Steve

protested otherwise, his father said he was crazy. "Itcan't work without
an amplifier. There's some trick."

"I kept saying no to my dad, telling him he had to see it, and finally
he actually walked down with me and saw it.And he said, 'Well I'llbe
a bat out of hell.'"

Jobs recalled the incident vividly because it was his first realization

that his father did not know everything. Then a more disconcerting
discovery began to dawn on him: He was smarter than his parents. He
had always admired his father's competence and savvy. "He was not an
educated man, but I had always thought he was pretty damn smart. He
didn't read much, but he could do alot. Almost everything mechanical,
he could figure it out." Yet the carbon microphone incident, Jobs said,
began ajarring process ofrealizing that he was infact more clever and
quick than his parents. "Itwas a very big moment that's burned into

my mind. When I realized that I was smarter than my parents, I felt
tremendous shame for having thought that. I will never forget that
moment." This discovery, he later told friends, along with the fact that
he was adopted, made him feel apart—detached and separate—from
both his family and the world.

Another layer of awareness occurred soon after. Not only did he
discover that he was brighter than his parents, but he discovered that

they knew this. Paul and ClaraJobs were loving parents, and they were
willing to adapt their lives to suit ason who was very smart—and also
willful. They would go to great lengths to accommodate him. And

soon Steve discovered this fact as well. "Both my parents got me. They
felt a lot of responsibility once they sensed that I was special. They
found ways to keep feeding me stuff and putting me in better schools.
They were willing to defer to my needs."

12

Walter Isaacson

So he grew up not only with a sense of having once been aban
doned, but also with a sense thathewas special. In his own mind, that
was more important in the formation ofhis personality.

School

Even before Jobs started elementary school, his mother had taught
him how to read. This, however, led to some problems once he got to
school. "Iwas kind ofbored for thefirst few years, soI occupied myself

by getting into trouble." It also soon became clear that Jobs, by both
nature and nurture, was not disposed to accept authority. "I encoun

tered authority ofa different kind than I had ever encountered before,
and I did not like it. And they really almost got me. They came close
to really beating any curiosity outofme."
His school, Monta Loma Elementary, was a series of low-slung

1950s buildings four blocks from his house. He countered his bore
dom by playing pranks. "I had a good friend named Rick Ferrentino,
and we'd get into all sorts oftrouble," he recalled. "Like we made little

posters announcing 'Bring Your Pet to School Day' Itwas crazy, with
dogs chasing cats all over, and the teachers were beside themselves."
Another time they convinced some kids to tell them the combination
numbers for their bike locks. "Thenwewent outside and switched all

ofthe locks, and nobody could get their bikes. It took them until late

that night to straighten things out." When he was in third grade, the
pranks became abit more dangerous. "One time we set offan explosive
under the chairof our teacher, Mrs.Thurman.We gave her a nervous
twitch."

Not surprisingly, he was sent home two or three times before he
finished third grade. By then, however, his father had begun to treat
him as special, and in his calm but firm manner he made itclear that he

expected the school to do the same. "Look, it's not his fault," PaulJobs
told the teachers, his son recalled. "Ifyou can't keep him interested,

it's your fault." His parents never punished him for his transgressions
at school. "My father's father was an alcoholic and whipped him with
a belt, but I'm not sure ifI ever got spanked." Both ofhis parents, he

Childhood

13

added, "knew the school was at fault for trying to make me memorize

stupid stuff rather than stimulating me." He was already starting to
show the admixture of sensitivity and insensitivity, bristliness and de
tachment, that would mark him for the rest of his life.

When it came time for him to go into fourth grade, the school
decided it was best to put Jobs and Ferrentino into separate classes.
The teacher for the advanced class was aspunky woman named Imogene Hill, known as "Teddy," and she became, Jobs said, "one of the

saints ofmy life." After watching him for acouple ofweeks, she figured
that the best way to handle him was to bribe him. "After school one

day, she gave me this workbook with math problems init, and she said,
1want you to take ithome and do this.' And I thought, Are you nuts?'
And then she pulled out one ofthese giant lollipops that seemed as

big as the world. And she said, 'When you're done with it, ifyou get it
mostly right, I willgive you this and five dollars.' And I handed it back

within two days." After afew months, he no longer required the bribes.
"Ijust wanted to learn and to please her."

She reciprocated by getting him ahobby kit for grinding alens and
making a camera. "I learned more from her than any other teacher,
and ifithadn't been for her I'm sure Iwould have gone to jail." Itrein
forced, once again, the idea that he was special. "In my class, itwas just
me she cared about. She saw something in me."
It was not merely intelligence that she saw. Years later she liked to

show offapicture ofthat year's class on Hawaii Day. Jobs had shown
up without the suggested Hawaiian shirt, but in the picture he is front
and center wearing one. He had, literally, been able to talk the shirt off
another kid's back.

Near the end of fourth grade, Mrs. Hill had Jobs tested. "I scored

at the high school sophomore level," he recalled. Now that itwas clear,
notonly to himselfand his parents butalso tohis teachers, that hewas

intellectually special, the school made the remarkable proposal that he

skip two grades and go right into seventh; itwould be the easiest way
to keep him challenged and stimulated. His parents decided, more sen
sibly, to have him skip only one grade.
The transition was wrenching. He was a socially awkward loner

who found himself with kids ayear older. Worse yet, the sixth grade

14

Walter Isaacson

was in a different school, Crittenden Middle. It was onlyeight blocks

from Monta Loma Elementary, butin many ways it was aworld apart,

located in a neighborhood filled with ethnic gangs. "Fights were a
daily occurrence; as were shakedowns in bathrooms," wrote the Silicon
Valleyjournalist Michael S. Malone. "Knives were regularly brought to
school as a show of macho."Around the time that Jobs arrived, a group

of students were jailed for a gang rape, and the bus of a neighboring
school was destroyed after its team beat Crittenden's in a wrestling
match.

Jobs was often bullied, and in the middle of seventh grade he

gave his parents an ultimatum. "I insisted they put me in a different
school," he recalled. Financially this was a tough demand. His par

ents were barely making ends meet, but by this point there was little
doubt that they would eventually bend to his will. "When they re
sisted, I told them I would just quit going to school ifI had to go back
to Crittenden. So they researched where the best schools were and
scraped together every dime and bought ahouse for $21,000 in anicer
district."

The move was only three miles to the south, to a former apricot
orchard in LosAltos that hadbeenturnedinto a subdivision of cookiecutter tract homes. Their house, at 2066 Crist Drive, was one story

with three bedrooms and an all-important attached garage with a roll-

down door facing the street.There PaulJobs could tinker with cars and
his son with electronics.

Its other significant attribute was that itwas just over the line inside
what was then the Cupertino-Sunnyvale School District, one of the
safest and best in thevalley. "When I moved here, these corners were
still orchards," Jobs pointed out as we walked infront ofhis old house.

"The guy who lived right there taught me how to be a good organic
gardener and to compost. He grew everything to perfection. I never
had better food in my life. That's when I began to appreciate organic
fruits and vegetables."

Even though they were not fervent about their faith, Jobs's parents
wanted him to have a religious upbringing, so they took him to the
Lutheran church most Sundays. That came to an end when he was

thirteen. InJuly 1968 Life magazine published ashocking cover show-

Childhood

15

ing a pair ofstarving children in Biafra. Jobs took it to Sunday school
and confronted the church's pastor. "IfI raise my finger, will God know
which one I'm going to raise even before I do it?"

The pastor answered, "Yes, God knows everything."
Jobs then pulled out the Life cover and asked, "Well, does God
know about this and what's going tohappen to those children?"
"Steve, I know you don't understand, but yes, God knows about
that."

Jobs announced that he didn't want to have anything to do with
worshipping such a God, and he never went back to church. He did,
however, spend years studying and trying to practice the tenets ofZen
Buddhism. Reflecting years later on his spiritual feelings, he said that
religion was at its best when itemphasized spiritual experiences rather
than received dogma. "The juice goes out ofChristianity when it be
comes too based on faith rather than on living like Jesus or seeing the
world as Jesus saw it," he told me. "I think different religions are differ
ent doors to the same house. Sometimes I think the house exists, and
sometimes I don't. It's thegreat mystery"

PaulJobs was then working at Spectra-Physics, acompanyin nearby
Santa Clara that made lasers for electronics and medical products. As
a machinist, he crafted the prototypes ofproducts that the engineers
were devising. His son was fascinated by the need for perfection. "La
sers require precision alignment," Jobs said. "The really sophisticated
ones, for airborne applications or medical, had very precise features.
They would tell my dad something like, This is what we want, and we
want it out ofone piece ofmetal so that the coefficients ofexpansion

are all the same.' And he had to figure out how to do it." Most pieces
hadto be made from scratch, which meant that Paul had to create cus

tom tools and dies. His son was impressed, but he rarely went to the
machine shop. "Itwould have been fun if he had gotten to teach me
how to use a mill and lathe. But unfortunately I never went, because
I was more interested in electronics."

One summer Paul took Steve to Wisconsin to visit the family's
dairy farm. Rural Ufe did not appeal to Steve, but one image stuck
with him. He saw acalfbeing born, and he was amazed when the tiny
animal struggled up within minutes and began to walk. "It was not

16

Walter Isaacson

something she had learned, but it was instead hardwired into her," he
recalled. "A human baby couldn't do that. I found it remarkable, even
though no one else did." He put itinhardware-software terms: "Itwas
as if something in the animal's body and in its brain had been engi
neered towork together instantly rather than being learned."
In ninth grade Jobs went to Homestead High, which had asprawl

ing campus of two-story cinderblock buildings painted pink that
served two thousand students. "It was designed by a famous prison

architect," Jobs recalled. "They wanted to make it indestructible." He
had developed a love ofwalking, and he walked the fifteen blocks to
school by himself each day.
He had few friends his own age, but he got to know some seniors
who were immersed in the counterculture of the late 1960s. It was a

time when the geek and hippie worlds were beginning to show some
overlap. "My friends were the really smart kids," he said. "Iwas inter
ested in mathandscience andelectronics. Theywere too,and also into
LSD and the whole counterculture trip."

His pranks by then typically involved electronics. At one point he
wired his house with speakers. But since speakers can also be used as
microphones, he built acontrol room in his closet, where he could listen
in on what was happening in other rooms. One night, when he had his

headphones on and was listening in on his parents' bedroom, his father
caught him and angrily demanded that he dismantle the system. He
spent many evenings visiting the garage ofLarry Lang, the engineer
who lived down the street from his old house. Lang eventually gave

Jobs the carbon microphone that had fascinated him, and he turned
him on to Heathkits, those assemble-it-yourself kits for making ham
radios and other electronic gear thatwere beloved bythe soldering set
backthen."Heathkits came with allthe boards and parts color-coded,

but the manual also explained the theory ofhow it operated," Jobs re
called. "Itmade you realize you could build and understand anything.

Once you built acouple ofradios, you'd see aTV in the catalogue and
say, 'Ican build that as well,' even ifyou didn't. Iwas very lucky, because
when I was a kid both my dad and the Heathkits made me believe I
couldbuild anything."

Lang also got him into the Hewlett-Packard Explorers Club, a

Childhood

17

group of fifteen or so students who met in the company cafeteria on
Tuesday nights. "They would get an engineer from one of the labs to
come and talk about what hewas working on," Jobs recalled. "My dad
would drive me there. I was in heaven. HP was a pioneer of lightemitting diodes. So we talked about what to do with them." Because

his father now worked for a laser company, that topic particularly in
terested him. One night hecornered one ofHP slaser engineers after a
talk and got a tour ofthe holography lab. But the most lasting impres
sion came from seeing the small computers the company was develop
ing. "I saw myfirst desktop computer there. It was called the 9100A,
and it was a glorified calculator but also really the first desktop com
puter. It was huge, maybe forty pounds, but it was a beauty ofa thing.
I fell in love with it."

The kids inthe Explorers Club were encouraged todo projects, and
Jobs decided to build a frequency counter, which measures the number

ofpulses per second inan electronic signal. He needed some parts that
HP made, so hepicked upthephone and called theCEO. "Back then,
people didn't have unlisted numbers. So I looked up Bill Hewlett in
Palo Alto and called him at home. And he answered and chatted with

me for twenty minutes. He got me the parts, but he also got me ajob in
theplant where they made frequency counters."Jobs worked there the
summer after his freshman year at Homestead High. "My dad would
drive me inthe morning and pick me up inthe evening."
His work mainly consisted of "just putting nuts and bolts on

things" on an assembly line. There was some resentment among his
fellow line workers toward the pushy kid who had talked his way in by
calling the CEO. "Iremember telling one ofthe supervisors, 1 love this
stuff, I love this stuff/ and then I asked him what he liked to do best.

And he said, To fuck, to fuck.'" Jobs had an easier time ingratiating
himselfwith the engineers who worked one floor above. "They served
doughnuts and coffee every morning at ten. So I'd go upstairs and hang
out with them."

Jobs liked to work. He also had a newspaper route—his father
would drive him when it was raining—and during his sophomore year
spent weekends and the summer as a stock clerk at a cavernous elec

tronics store, Haltek. It was to electronics what his father s junkyards

18

Walter Isaacson

were to auto parts: a scavenger's paradise sprawling over an entire city
block withnew, used, salvaged, andsurplus components crammed onto
warrens of shelves, dumped unsorted into bins, and piled in an out
door yard. "Out in the back, near the bay, they had a fenced-in area

with things like Polaris submarine interiors that had been ripped and
sold for salvage," he recalled. "All the controls and buttons were right
there. The colors were military greens and grays, but they had these
switches and bulb covers of amber and red. There were these big old

lever switches that, when you flipped them, it was awesome, like you
were blowing up Chicago."
At the wooden counters up front, laden with thick catalogues in
tattered binders, people would haggle for switches, resistors, capacitors,
andsometimes thelatest memory chips. His father used to do that for

auto parts, and he succeeded because he knew the value ofeach bet
ter than the clerks. Jobs followed suit. He developed a knowledge of

electronic parts that was honed by his love ofnegotiating and turning
a profit. Hewould go to electronic flea markets, such as the San Jose
swap meet, haggle for a used circuit board that contained some valu
able chips orcomponents, and then sell those tohis manager atHaltek.
Jobs was able to gethis first car, with his father's help, when hewas
fifteen. It was a two-tone Nash Metropolitan that his father hadfitted
outwith an MG engine. Jobs didn't really like it, but he did notwant
to tell his fatherthat, or miss out on the chance to have his owncar. "In

retrospect, a Nash Metropolitan might seem like the most wickedly
cool car," he later said. "But at the time it was the mostuncool car in
the world. Still, it was a car, so that was great." Within a year he had

saved up enough from his various jobs that he could trade up to a red
Fiat 850 coupe with an Abarth engine. "My dad helped me buy and
inspect it. The satisfaction ofgetting paid and saving up for something,
that wasveryexciting."
That same summer, between his sophomore and junior years at

Homestead, Jobs began smoking marijuana. "I got stoned for the first
time that summer. I was fifteen, and then began using pot regularly."

At one point his father found some dope in his son's Fiat. "What's
this?" he asked. Jobs coolly replied, "That's marijuana." It was one of
the few times in his life that he faced his father's anger. "That was the

Childhood

19

only real fight I ever got inwith my dad," he said. But his father again
bent tohis will. "He wanted me topromise that I'd never use pot again,
but I wouldn't promise." In fact by his senior year he was also dabbling
inLSD and hash as well as exploring the mind-bending effects ofsleep
deprivation. "I was starting to get stoned a bit more. We would also
drop acid occasionally, usually in fields or in cars."

He also flowered intellectually during his last two years in high
school and found himself at the intersection, as he had begun to see
it, of those who were geekily immersed in electronics and those who
were into literature and creative endeavors. "I started to listen to music

a whole lot, and I started to read more outside of just science and
technology—Shakespeare, Plato. I loved King Lear" His other favor
ites included Moby-Dick and thepoems ofDylan Thomas. I asked him
why herelated to King Lear and Captain Ahab, two ofthemost willful
and driven characters inliterature, but he didn't respond tothe connec

tion I was making, so I let itdrop. "When I was asenior I had this phe
nomenal AP English class. The teacher was this guy who looked like
Ernest Hemingway. Hetook abunch ofus snowshoeing inYosemite."
One course thatJobs took would become part ofSilicon Valley lore:
the electronics class taught by John McCollum, a former Navy pilot
who had a showman's flair for exciting his students with such tricks as
firing up aTesla coil. His little stockroom, to which he would lend the

key to pet students, was crammed with transistors and other compo
nents he had scored.

McCollum's classroom was in a shed-like building on the edge of
the campus, next tothe parking lot. "This is where itwas,"Jobs recalled
as he peered in the window, "and here, next door, is where the auto

shop class used tobe."The juxtaposition highlighted the shift from the
interests ofhisfather's generation. "Mr. McCollum feltthat electronics
class was the new auto shop."

McCollum believed in military discipline and respect for authority.
Jobs didn't. His aversion to authority was something he no longer tried
to hide, and he affected an attitude that combined wiry and weird in
tensity with aloofrebelliousness. McCollum later said, "He was usually
off in a corner doing something on his own and really didn't want to
have much of anything to dowitheither meor the restofthe class." He

20

Walter Isaacson

never trusted Jobs with a key to the stockroom. One day Jobs needed
a part that was not available, so he made acollect call to the manufac
turer, Burroughs in Detroit, and said he was designing a new product
and wanted to test out the part. It arrived by air freight a fewdays later.
When McCollum asked how he had gotten it, Jobs described—with
defiant pride—the collect call and thetale he had told. "I was furious,"
McCollum said. "That was not the way I wanted my students to be
have." Jobs's response was, "I don't have the money for the phone call.
They've got plentyof money."
Jobs took McCollum's class for only one year, rather thanthe three
that it was offered. For one of his projects, he made a device with a

photocell that would switch onacircuit when exposed to light, some
thing any high school science student could have done. He was far
more interested in playing withlasers, something he learned from his
father. With a few friends, he created light shows for parties by bounc

inglasers off mirrors that were attached to the speakers of his stereo
system.

CHAPTER

TWO

ODD COUPLE
The Two Steves

Jobs and Wozniak in the garage, 1976

Woz

While a student in McCollum's class, Jobs became friends with a

graduate who was the teacher's all-time favorite and a school legend
for his wizardry in the class. Stephen Wozniak, whose younger brother
had been on a swim team with Jobs, was almost five years older than
Jobs and far more knowledgeable about electronics. But emotionally
and socially he was still a high school geek.
LikeJobs,Wozniak learned a lot at his father's knee. But their les

sons were different. Paul Jobs was a high school dropout who, when

fixing up cars, knew how to turn atidy profit by striking the right deal
21

22

Walter Isaacson

on parts. Francis Wozniak, known as Jerry, was a brilliant engineer
ing graduate from CalTech, where he had quarterbacked the football
team, who became a rocket scientist at Lockheed. He exalted engi

neering andlooked down onthose in business, marketing, andsales. "I
remember him telling methat engineering was the highest level ofim
portance you could reach in theworld," Steve Wozniak later recalled.
"It takes society to a newlevel."
One of Steve Wozniak's first memories was going to his father's

workplace on a weekend and being shown electronic parts, with his
dad "putting them on a table with me so I got to play with them." He
watched with fascination as his father tried to get a waveform line
on a video screen to stay flat so he could show that one of his circuit

designs was working properly. "I could see that whatever my dad was
doing, it was important and good." Woz, as he was known even then,
would ask about the resistors and transistors lying around the house,

and his father would pull out a blackboard to illustrate what they did.
"He would explain what a resistor was by going all the way back to
atoms and electrons. He explained how resistors worked when I was in
second grade, not by equations but by having me picture it."
Woz's father taught him something else that became ingrained in
his childlike, socially awkward personality: Never lie. "My dad believed
in honesty. Extreme honesty. That's the biggest thing he taught me.
I never lie, even to this day." (The only partial exception was in the
service ofa good practical joke.) In addition, he imbued his son with
an aversion to extreme ambition, which setWozapartfrom Jobs. At an

Apple product launch event in 2010, forty years after they met, Woz
reflected on their differences. "Myfather told me, 'You always want to
be in the middle,'" he said. "I didn't want to be up withthe high-level

people like Steve. My dad was an engineer, and that's what I wanted
tobe. I was way too shy ever to be abusiness leader like Steve."
By fourth grade Wozniak became, as he put it, one ofthe "electron
ics kids." He had an easier time making eye contact with a transistor

than with a girl, and he developed the chunky and stooped look of
a guy who spends most ofhis time hunched over circuit boards. At
the same age when Jobs was puzzling over a carbon microphone that

Odd Couple

23

his dad couldn't explain, Wozniak was using transistors to build an
intercom system featuring amplifiers, relays, lights, and buzzers that
connected the kids' bedrooms of six houses in the neighborhood. And
at an age when Jobs was building Heathkits, Wozniak was assembling
a transmitter and receiver from Hallicrafters, the most sophisticated
radios available.

Woz spent a lot of time at home reading his father's electronics

journals, and he became enthralled by stories about new computers,
such as the powerful ENIAC. Because Boolean algebra came naturally
to him, he marveled athow simple, rather than complex, the comput
ers were. In eighth grade he built a calculator that included one hun
dred transistors, two hundred diodes, and two hundred resistors on ten

circuit boards. It won top prize inalocal contest run by the Air Force,

even though the competitors included students through twelfth grade.
Woz became more ofa loner when the boys his age began going
out with girls and partying, endeavors that he found far more com

plex than designing circuits. "Where before I was popular and riding
bikes and everything, suddenly I was socially shut out," he recalled.
"It seemed like nobody spoke to me for the longest time." He found
an outlet by playing juvenile pranks. In twelfth grade he built an elec
tronic metronome—one ofthose tick-tick-tick devices that keep time
in music class—and realized it sounded like a bomb. So he took the

labels offsome big batteries, taped them together, and put itin aschool
locker; he rigged itto start ticking faster when the locker opened. Later
that day he got called to the principal's office. He thought it was be
cause he had won, yet again, the school's top math prize. Instead he
was confronted by the police. The principal had been summoned when

the device was found, bravely ran onto the football field clutching itto
his chest, and pulled the wires off. Woz tried and failed to suppress his
laughter. Heactually got sent tothe juvenile detention center, where he

spent the night. It was a memorable experience. He taught the other
prisoners how to disconnect the wires leading to the ceiling fans and
connect them to the bars so people got shocked when touching them.
Getting shocked was abadge ofhonor for Woz. He prided himself
on being a hardware engineer, which meant that random shocks were

24

Walter Isaacson

routine. He once devised a roulette gamewhere four people put their
thumbs in a slot;when the ball landed, one would get shocked."Hard

ware guys will play this game, but software guys are too chicken," he
noted.

During his senior year he got a part-time job at Sylvania and had
the chance to workon a computer forthe first time. He learned FOR
TRAN from a book and read the manuals for most of the systems of

the day, starting with the Digital Equipment PDP-8. Then hestudied
the specs for the latest microchips and tried to redesign the computers
using these newer parts. The challenge he set himself was to replicate
the design using the fewest components possible. Each night he would
try to improve his drawing from the night before. By the end ofhis
senior year, he had become a master. "Iwas now designing computers
with halfthe number of chips the actual company had in their own
design, but only on paper." He never told his friends. After all, most
seventeen-year-olds were getting their kicks in other ways.
OnThanksgiving weekend ofhis senior year, Wozniak visited the
University ofColorado. It was closed for the holiday, but he found an

engineering student who took him on a tour ofthe labs. He begged
his father to lethim go there, even though theout-of-state tuition was

more than the family could easily afford. They struck adeal: He would
be allowed to go for one year, but then he would transfer to De Anza
Community College back home. After arriving atColorado in the fall
of 1969, he spent so much time playing pranks (such as producing
reams ofprintouts saying "Fuck Nixon") that he failed a couple ofhis
courses and was put on probation. In addition, he created aprogram to
calculate Fibonacci numbers that burned up so much computer time

the university threatened to bill him for the cost. So he readily lived up
to his bargain with his parents and transferred to DeAnza.
After a pleasant year at De Anza, Wozniak took time off to make
some money. He found work at a company that made computers for
theCalifornia Motor Vehicle Department, and acoworker made him a
wonderful offer: Hewould provide some spare chips so Wozniak could
make one ofthe computers he had been sketching onpaper. Wozniak
decided touse as few chips as possible, both as apersonal challenge and
because he did not want to take advantage of his colleague's largesse.

Odd Couple

25

Much of the work was done in the garage of a friend just around
the corner, Bill Fernandez, who was still atHomestead High. Tolubri
cate their efforts, they drank large amounts of Cragmont cream soda,
riding their bikes to the Sunnyvale Safeway to return the bottles, col

lect the deposits, and buy more. "That's how we started referring to it
as the Cream Soda Computer," Wozniak recalled. It was basically a
calculator capable ofmultiplying numbers entered by a set ofswitches
and displaying the results inbinary code with little lights.
When it was finished, Fernandez told Wozniak there was someone

at Homestead High he should meet. "His name is Steve. He likes to

do pranks like you do, and he's also into building electronics like you
are." It may have been the most significant meeting in a Silicon Val
ley garage since Hewlett went into Packard's thirty-two years earlier.
"Steve and I just sat on the sidewalk in front of Bill's house for the

longest time, just sharing stories—mostly about pranks we'd pulled,
and also what kind ofelectronic designs we'd done," Wozniak recalled.

"We had so much in common. Typically, it was really hard for me to
explain to people what kind ofdesign stuffI worked on, but Steve got
itright away. And I liked him. He was kind ofskinny and wiry and fiill
ofenergy." Jobs was also impressed. "Woz was the first person I'd met

who knew more electronics than I did," he once said, stretching his
own expertise. "I liked him right away. I was a little more mature than
myyears, andhewas a little less mature thanhis, soit evened out.Woz

was very bright, but emotionally he was my age."

In addition to their interest in computers, they shared a passion
for music. "Itwas an incredible time for music," Jobs recalled. "Itwas

like living at a time when Beethoven and Mozart were alive. Really.
People will look back on itthat way. And Woz and I were deeply into
it." In particular, Wozniak turned Jobs on to the glories ofBob Dylan.
"We tracked down this guy in Santa Cruz who put out this newsletter
onDylan,"Jobs said. "Dylan taped all ofhis concerts, and some ofthe

people around him were not scrupulous, because soon there were tapes
all around. Bootlegs ofeverything. And this guy had them all."
Hunting down Dylan tapes soon became ajoint venture. "The two
ofus would go tramping through SanJose and Berkeley and ask about
Dylan bootlegs and collect them," said Wozniak. "We'd buy brochures

26

Walter Isaacson

of Dylanlyrics and stayup lateinterpreting them.Dylan's words struck
chords of creative thinking." AddedJobs,"I had more than a hundred
hours, including everyconcert on the '65 and '66 tour," the one where
Dylan went electric. Both of them bought high-end TEAC reel-toreel tape decks. "I would use mine at a low speedto record many con
certs on one tape," saidWozniak. Jobs matchedhis obsession: "Instead
of big speakers I bought a pair of awesome headphones and would just
lie in my bed and listen to that stufffor hours."
Jobs had formed a club at Homestead High to put on musicand-lightshows and also play pranks. (Theyonce glued a gold-painted
toilet seatonto a flower planter.) It wascalled the BuckFry Club, a play
on the name of the principal. Eventhough they had already graduated,
Wozniak and his friend Allen Baum joined forces with Jobs, at the
end of his junior year, to produce a farewell gesture for the departing
seniors. Showing off the Homestead campus four decades later, Jobs
paused at the scene of the escapade and pointed. "See that balcony?
That's where wedidthe banner prankthat sealed ourfriendship." On a
bigbedsheet Baum hadtie-dyed withthe school's green andwhite col
ors, they painted a huge hand flipping the middle-finger salute. Baum's
nice Jewish mother helped them draw it and showed them how to do

the shading andshadows to make it look more real. "I know whatthat
is," she snickered. Theydevised a system of ropes andpulleys sothat it
could be dramatically lowered as the graduating class marched pastthe
balcony, and they signed it "SWAB JOB," the initials ofWozniak and
Baum combined with part ofJobs's name. The prank became part of
school lore—and got Jobs suspended one more time.

Another prank involved a pocket device Wozniak built that could
emitTV signals. He would take it to a room where a group of people
were watching TV, such as in a dorm, and secretly press the button so
that the screen would getfuzzy withstatic. When someone gotup and
whacked the set,Wozniakwouldlet go of the button and the picture

would clear up. Once hehadtheunsuspecting viewers hopping up and
down at his will, he would make things harder. He would keep the

picture fuzzy until someone touched the antenna. Eventually hewould
make people thinktheyhadto hold the antenna while standing on one
foot or touching the top of the set.Years later, at a keynote presenta-

Odd Couple

27

tionwhere he was having his own trouble getting a video to work, Jobs
broke from his script and recounted the fun they had with the device.
"Woz would have it in his pocket and we'd go into a dorm ... where

abunch offolks would be, like, watching Star Trek, and he'd screw up
the TV, and someone would go up to fix it, and just as they had the
foot offthe ground he would turn it back on, and as they put their foot
back on the ground he'd screw it up again." Contorting himself into
a pretzel onstage, Jobs concluded to great laughter, "And within five
minutes he would have someone like this."

The Blue Box

The ultimate combination of pranks and electronics—and the esca

pade that helped to create Apple—was launched one Sunday after
noon when Wozniak read an article inEsquire that his mother had left
for him on the kitchen table. It was September 1971, and he was about

to drive off the next day to Berkeley, his third college. The story, Ron
Rosenbaum's "Secrets of the Little Blue Box," described how hackers

and phone phreakers had found ways to make long-distance calls for
free by replicating the tones that routed signals on the AT&T network.
"Halfway through the article, I had to call my best friend, Steve Jobs,
and read parts ofthis long article to him," Wozniak recalled. He knew

that Jobs, then beginning his senior year, was one of the few people
who would share his excitement.

Ahero of the piece was John Draper, ahacker known as Captain
Crunch because he had discovered that the sound emitted by the toy
whistle that came with the breakfast cereal was the same 2600 Hertz

tone used by the phone network's call-routing switches. It could fool the
system into allowing a long-distance call to go through without extra
charges. The article revealed thatother tones that served to route calls

could be found in an issue ofthe Bell System TechnicalJournal, which
AT&T immediately began asking libraries to pull from their shelves.

As soon as Jobs got the call from Wozniak that Sunday afternoon,
he knew they would have to get their hands on the technical journal
right away. "Woz picked me up afew minutes later, and we went to the

28

Walter Isaacson

library at SLAC [the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center] to see ifwe
could findit,"Jobsrecounted. It was Sunday and the library was closed,

but they knew how to getin through a door thatwas rarely locked. "I
remember that we were furiously digging through the stacks, and it
was Wozwho finally found thejournal with all the frequencies. It was

like, holy shit, and we opened it and there it was. We kept saying to
ourselves, It's real. Holy shit, it's real.' It was all laid out—the tones,
the frequencies."

Wozniak went to Sunnyvale Electronics before it closed that eve

ning and bought the parts to make an analog tone generator. Jobs had
built afrequency counter when he was part ofthe HP Explorers Club,
and they used it to calibrate the desired tones. With a dial, they could
replicate and tape-record the sounds specified in the article. By mid
night they were ready to test it. Unfortunately the oscillators they used
were not quite stable enough to replicate the right chirps to fool the
phone company. "We could see the instability using Steve's frequency
counter," recalled Wozniak, "and we just couldn't make it work. I had
toleave for Berkeley the next morning, so we decided I would work on
building a digital version once I got there."
No one had ever created a digital version of a Blue Box, butWoz
was made for the challenge. Using diodes and transistors from Radio
Shack, and with the help ofa music student inhis dorm who had per

fect pitch, he got itbuilt before Thanksgiving. "I have never designed a
circuit I was prouder of," he said. "I still think itwas incredible."
One night Wozniak drove down from Berkeley to Jobs's house to
try it. They attempted to call Wozniak's uncle in Los Angeles, but
they got a wrong number. It didn't matter; their device had worked.
"Hi! We're calling you for free! We're calling you for free!" Wozniak
shouted. The person on the other end was confused and annoyed. Jobs
chimed in, "We're calling from California! From California! With a
Blue Box."This probably baffled the man even more, since he was also
in California.

At first the Blue Box was used for fun andpranks. The mostdaring

ofthese was when they called the Vatican and Wozniak pretended to
be Henry Kissinger wanting to speak to the pope. "Ve are at de sum
mit meeting in Moscow, and ve need to talk to de pope," Woz intoned.

Odd Couple

29

He was told that it was 5:30 a.m. and the pope was sleeping. Whenhe
called back, he got a bishop who was supposed to serve as the transla
tor. But they never actually got the pope on the line. "They realized
that Woz wasn't Henry Kissinger," Jobs recalled. "We were at a public
phone booth."

It was then that they reached an important milestone, one that

would establish a pattern in their partnerships: Jobs came up with
the idea that the Blue Box could be more than merely a hobby; they
could build and sell them. "I got together the rest ofthe components,
like the casing and power supply and keypads, and figured out how
we could price it," Jobs said, foreshadowing roles he would play when
they founded Apple. The finished product was about the size of two

decks ofplaying cards. The parts cost about $40, andJobs decided they
should sell it for $150.

Following the lead ofother phone phreaks such as Captain Crunch,
they gave themselves handles. Wozniak became "Berkeley Blue,"
Jobs was "Oaf Tobark." They took the device to college dorms and
gave demonstrations by attaching it to a phone and speaker. While
the potential customers watched, they would call the Ritz in London
or a dial-a-joke service in Australia. "We made a hundred or so Blue
Boxes and sold almost all ofthem," Jobs recalled.

The fun and profits came to an end at aSunnyvale pizza parlor.Jobs
and Wozniak were about to drive to Berkeley with a Blue Box they
had just finished making. Jobs needed money and was eager to sell, so
he pitched the device to some guys at the next table. They were inter
ested, so Jobs went to a phone booth and demonstrated it with a call

to Chicago. The prospects said they had to go to their car for money.
"So we walk over to the car, Woz and me, and I've got the Blue Box
in my hand, and the guy gets in, reaches under the seat, and he pulls
out agun,"Jobs recounted. He had never been that close to agun, and
he was terrified. "So he's pointing the gun right at my stomach, and he
says, 'Hand it over, brother.' My mind raced. There was the car door

here, and I thought maybe I could slam iton his legs and we could run,

but there was this high probability that he would shoot me. So I slowly
handed it to him, very carefully." It was aweird sort ofrobbery. The
guy who took the Blue Box actually gave Jobs a phone number and

30

Walter Isaacson

said he would try to pay for it if it worked. WhenJobs latercalled the
number, theguy said hecouldn't figure outhow to use it. So Jobs, in his
felicitous way, convinced theguy to meet him andWozniak at a public

place. But they ended up deciding not to have another encounter with
the gunman, even onthe offchance they could gettheir $150.
The partnership paved the way for what would be a bigger ad
venture together. "Ifit hadn't been for the Blue Boxes, there wouldn't
have been anApple," Jobs later reflected. "I'm 100% sure ofthat. Woz
and I learned how to work together, and we gained the confidence
thatwe could solve technical problems and actually put something into

production." They had created a device with a little circuit board that
could control billions of dollars' worth of infrastructure. "You cannot

believe how much confidence that gave us." Woz came to the same

conclusion: "It was probably a bad idea selling them, but it gave us a
taste ofwhat we could do with my engineering skills and his vision."
The Blue Box adventure established a template for a partnership that
would soon be born.Wozniak would be the gentle wizard coming up
with a neat inventionthat he wouldhave been happyjust to give away,

and Jobs would figure out how to make ituser-friendly, put ittogether
ina package, market it,and make afew bucks.

CHAPTER

THREE

THE DROPOUT
Turn On, Tune In . ..

Chrisann Brennan

Toward the end ofhis senior year at Homestead, in the spring of1972,
Jobs started going out with agirl named Chrisann Brennan, who was

about his age but still ajunior. With her light brown hair, green eyes,
high cheekbones, and fragile aura, she was very attractive. She was also
enduring the breakup ofher parents' marriage, which made her vulner

able. "We worked together on an animated movie, then started going
out, and she became myfirst real girlfriend,"Jobs recalled. As Brennan

later said, "Steve was kind ofcrazy. That's why Iwas attracted to him."

Jobs's craziness was ofthe cultivated sort. He had begun his lifelong
experiments with compulsive diets, eating only fruits and vegetables,

so he was as lean and tight as awhippet. He learned to stare at people
without blinking, and he perfected long silences punctuated by stac
cato bursts of fast talking. This odd mix of intensity and aloofness,
combined with his shoulder-length hair and scraggly beard, gave him
the aura of a crazed shaman. He oscillated between charismatic and
creepy. "He shuffled around and looked half-mad," recalled Brennan.

"He had alot ofangst. Itwas like abig darkness around him."
Jobs had begun to drop acid bythen, and heturned Brennan onto
31

32

Walter Isaacson

it as well, in a wheat field just outside Sunnyvale. "It was great," he re
called. "I had beenlistening to a lot of Bach. All of a suddenthe wheat

field was playing Bach. It was the most wonderful feeling of my life
up to that point. I felt like the conductor of this symphony with Bach
coming through the wheat."
That summer of 1972, afterhisgraduation, he and Brennan moved
to a cabin in the hills above Los Altos. Tm going to go live in a cabin
with Chrisann," he announced to his parents one day. His father was

furious. "No you're not," he said. "Over my dead body." They had re
cently fought about marijuana, and once again the younger Jobs was
willful. He just said good-bye andwalked out.
Brennan spent a lotofher time thatsummer painting; she was tal
ented, and she did apicture ofaclown for Jobs thathekept onthe wall.

Jobs wrote poetry and played guitar. He could be brutally cold and rude
to her at times, but he was also entrancing andable to impose hiswill.

"He was an enlightened being who was cruel," she recalled. "That's a
strange combination."

Midway through the summer, Jobs was almost killed when his red
Fiat caught fire. He was driving on Skyline Boulevard in the Santa
Cruz Mountains with a high school friend, Tim Brown, who looked
back, saw flames coming from the engine, and casually said toJobs,
"Pull over, your car is on fire." Jobs did. His father, despite their argu
ments, drove out to the hills to tow the Fiat home.

In order to find a way to make money for a new car, Jobs got
Wozniak to drive him to DeAnza College tolook onthehelp-wanted
bulletin board. They discovered that the Westgate Shopping Center in
San Jose was seeking college students who could dress up in costumes
and amuse the kids. So for $3 an hour, Jobs, Wozniak, and Brennan

donned heavy full-body costumes and headgear to play Alice in
Wonderland, the Mad Hatter, and the White Rabbit. Wozniak, in his
earnest and sweet way, found it fun. "I said, 'I want to do it, it's my
chance, because I love children/1 think Steve looked atit as alousyjob,
but I looked at it as a fun adventure." Jobs did indeed find it a pain. "It

was hot, the costumes were heavy, and after awhile I felt like I wanted
to smack some of the kids." Patience was never one of his virtues.

TheDropout

33

Reed College

Seventeen years earlier, Jobs's parents had made a pledge when they
adopted him: He would go to college. So they had worked hard and

saved dutifully for his college fund, which was modest but adequate by
the time he graduated. But Jobs, becoming ever more willful, did not
make it easy. At first he toyed with not going to college at all. "I think
I might have headed to New York ifI didn't go to college," he recalled,
musing on how different his world—and perhaps all ofours—might
have been ifhe had chosen that path. When his parents pushed him
to go to college, he responded in a passive-aggressive way. He did not

consider state schools, such as Berkeley, where Woz then was, despite
the fact that they were more affordable. Nor did he look at Stanford,
just up the road and likely to offer ascholarship. "The kids who went

to Stanford, they already knewwhat they wanted to do," he said. "They
weren't really artistic. I wanted something that was more artistic and
interesting."

Instead he insisted on applying only to Reed College, aprivate lib
eral arts school in Portland, Oregon, that was one of the most expen
sive in the nation. He was visiting Woz at Berkeley when his father
called to say an acceptance letter had arrived from Reed, and he tried
to talk Steve out of going there. So did his mother. It was far more

than they could afford, they said. But their son responded with an ul
timatum: Ifhe couldn't go to Reed, he wouldn't go anywhere. They
relented, as usual.

Reed had only one thousand students, halfthe number at Home

stead High. It was known for its free-spirited hippie lifestyle, which
combined somewhat uneasily with its rigorous academic standards and

core curriculum. Five years earlier Timothy Leary, the guru ofpsyche

delic enlightenment, had sat cross-legged at the Reed College com
mons while on his League for Spiritual Discovery (LSD) college tour,
during which he exhorted his listeners, "Like every great religion of
the past we seek to find the divinity within... .These ancient goals
we define in the metaphor ofthe present—turn on, tune in, drop out."

34

Walter Isaacson

Manyof Reed's students took all three of those injunctions seriously;
the dropout rateduring the 1970s was more than one-third.
When it came time for Jobs to matriculate in the fall of 1972, his

parents drove him up to Portland, but in another small act of rebel
lion he refused to let them come on campus. In fact he refrained from

even saying good-bye or thanks. He recounted the moment later with
uncharacteristic regret:

It's oneof the things in life I really feel ashamed about. I was not very
sensitive, and I hurt theirfeelings. I shouldn't have. They had done so
much to make sure I could go there, butI justdidn't want them around.
I didn't want anyone to know I had parents. I wanted to belike an or

phan who had bummed around the country on trains and just arrived
out of nowhere, with no roots, no connections, no background.

In late 1972, there was a fundamental shift happening in Ameri

can campus life. The nation's involvement in the Vietnam War, and
the draft that accompanied it, was winding down. Political activism
at colleges receded and in many late-night dorm conversations was

replaced by an interest in pathways to personal fulfillment. Jobs found
himself deeply influenced by a variety ofbooks on spirituality and
enlightenment, most notably Be Here Now, aguide to meditation and
the wonders ofpsychedelic drugs by Baba Ram Dass, born Richard
Alpert. "It was profound," Jobs said. "It transformed me and many of
my friends."
The closest of those friends was another wispy-bearded freshman

named Daniel Kottke, who met Jobs aweek after they arrived at Reed
and shared his interest in Zen, Dylan, and acid. Kottke, from awealthy
New York suburb, was smart butlow-octane, with a sweet flower-child
demeanor made even mellower by his interest in Buddhism. That

spiritual quest had caused him to eschew material possessions, but he
was nonetheless impressed by Jobs's tape deck. "Steve had a TEAC
reel-to-reel an(l massive quantities ofDylan bootlegs," Kottke recalled.
"He was both really cool and high-tech."

Jobs started spending much ofhis time with Kottke and his girl
friend, Elizabeth Holmes, even after he insulted her attheir first meet-

TheDropout

35

ing by grilling her about how much money it would take to get her
to have sex with another man. They hitchhiked to the coast together,
engaged in the typical dorm raps about the meaning of life, attended
thelove festivals at thelocal Hare Krishna temple, andwentto the Zen
center for free vegetarian meals. "It was a lot of fun," said Kottke,"but

also philosophical, and we took Zenvery seriously."
Jobs began sharing with Kottke other books, including Zen Mind,

Beginners Mind by Shunryu Suzuki, Autobiography of a Yogi by
Paramahansa Yogananda, and Cutting Through Spiritual Materialism
by Chogyam Trungpa. They created a meditation room in the attic

crawl space above Elizabeth Holmes's room and fixed it up with Indian
prints, a dhurrie rug,candles, incense, and meditation cushions. "There

was ahatch inthe ceiling leading to an attic which had ahuge amount
ofspace," Jobs said. "We took psychedelic drugs there sometimes, but
mainlywe just meditated."

Jobs's engagement with Eastern spirituality, and especially Zen
Buddhism, was not just some passing fancy or youthful dabbling. He
embraced itwith his typical intensity, and itbecame deeply ingrained
in his personality. "Steve is very much Zen," said Kottke. "It was a

deep influence. You see it in his whole approach ofstark, minimalist

aesthetics, intense focus." Jobs also became deeply influenced by the
emphasis that Buddhism places on intuition. "I began to realize that an
intuitive understanding and consciousness was more significant than
abstract thinking and intellectual logical analysis," he later said. His
intensity, however, made itdifficult for him to achieve inner peace; his

Zen awareness was not accompanied by an excess of calm, peace of
mind, or interpersonal mellowness.

He and Kottke enjoyed playing anineteenth-century German vari
ant ofchess called Kriegspiel, in which the players sit back-to-back;
each has his own board and pieces and cannot see those of his oppo
nent. Amoderator informs them ifamove they want to make is legal
or illegal, and they have to try to figure out where their opponent's
pieces are. "The wildest game I played with them was during a lash
ing rainstorm sitting by the fireside," recalled Holmes, who served as

moderator. "They were tripping on acid. They were moving so fast I
could barely keep up with them."

36

Walter Isaacson

Another bookthat deeply influenced Jobs duringhis freshman year
was Dietfor a Small Planet by Frances Moore Lappe, which extolled

the personal and planetary benefits of vegetarianism. "That's when I
swore off meat pretty much for good," he recalled. But the book also
reinforced his tendency to embrace extreme diets, which included
purges, fasts, or eating only one ortwo foods, such as carrots or apples,
for weeks on end.

Jobs and Kottke became serious vegetarians during their freshman

year. "Steve got into it even more than I did," said Kottke. "He was
living off Roman Meal cereal." They would go shopping at a farmers'
co-op, where Jobs would buy abox ofcereal, which would last aweek,
and other bulk health food. "Hewould buy flats of dates andalmonds
and lots of carrots, and he got a Champion juicer and we'd make car

rot juice and carrot salads. There is astory about Steve turning orange
from eating so many carrots, and there is some truth to that." Friends
remember him having, at times, a sunset-like orange hue.

Jobs's dietary habits became even more obsessive when he read Mucusless DietHealing System by Arnold Ehret, an early twentieth-century
German-born nutrition fanatic. He believed in eating nothing but

fruits and starchless vegetables, which he said prevented the body from

forming harmful mucus, and he advocated cleansing the body regularly
through prolonged fasts. That meant the end of even Roman Meal
cerea]_or any bread, grains, or milk. Jobs began warning friends of
the mucus dangers lurking in their bagels. "I got into it in my typical
nutso way," he said. At one point he and Kottke went for an entire
week eating only apples, and then Jobs began to try even purer fasts.
He started with two-day fasts, and eventually tried to stretch them to
a week or more, breaking them carefully with large amounts ofwater

and leafy vegetables. "After aweek you start to feel fantastic," he said.
"You get aton ofvitality from not having to digest all this food. I was
in great shape. I felt I could get up and walk to San Francisco anytime
I wanted."

Vegetarianism and Zen Buddhism, meditation and spirituality, acid
and rock—Jobs rolled together, in an amped-up way, the multiple im

pulses that were hallmarks ofthe enlightenment-seeking campus sub
culture oftheera. And even though hebarely indulged it at Reed, there

TheDropout

37

was stillan undercurrent of electronic geekiness in his soul that would
someday combine surprisingly well with the rest of the mix.

Robert Friedland

In order to raise some cash one day, Jobs decided to sell his IBM
Selectric typewriter. He walked into the room of the student who had

offered to buy it only to discover that he was having sex with his girl
friend. Jobs startedto leave, but the student invited him to take a seat

and wait while they finished. "I thought, This is kind of far out,'"
Jobs later recalled. And thus began his relationship with Robert Friedland, one of the few people inJobs's life who were able to mesmerize
him. He adopted some of Friedland's charismatic traits and for a few

years treated him almost like a guru—until he began to see him as a
charlatan.

Friedland was four years older than Jobs, but still an undergradu
ate. The son of an Auschwitz survivor who became aprosperous Chi
cago architect, he had originally gone to Bowdoin, aliberal arts college
in Maine. But while a sophomore, he was arrested for possession of
24,000 tablets ofLSD worth $125,000. The local newspaper pictured
him with shoulder-length wavy blond hair smiling at the photogra
phers as he was led away. He was sentenced to two years at afederal
prison in Virginia, from which he was paroled in 1972. That fall he

headed offto Reed, where he immediately ran for student body presi
dent, saying that he needed to clear his name from the "miscarriage of
justice" he had suffered. He won.

Friedland had heard Baba Ram Dass, the author of Be Here Now,

give aspeech in Boston, and like Jobs and Kottke had gotten deeply
into Eastern spirituality. During the summer of 1973, he traveled to

India to meet Ram Dass's Hindu guru, Neem Karoli Baba, famously
known to his many followers as Maharaj-ji. When he returned that
fall, Friedland had taken aspiritual name and walked around insandals

and flowing Indian robes. He had aroom off campus, above agarage,
and Jobs would go there many afternoons toseek him out. Hewas en
tranced by the apparent intensity ofFriedland's conviction thata state

38

Walter Isaacson

of enlightenment truly existed and could be attained. "He turned me
on to a different level of consciousness," Jobs said.

Friedland found Jobs fascinating as well. "He was always walking
around barefoot," he later told a reporter. "The thing that struck me

was his intensity. Whatever he was interested in he would generally
carry to an irrational extreme."Jobs had honed his trick ofusing stares
and silences to master other people. "One of his numbers was to stare

atthe person he was talking to. He would stare into their fucking eye
balls, ask some question, and would want aresponse without the other
person averting their eyes."

According to Kottke, some ofJobs's personality traits—including a
few that lasted throughout his career—were borrowed from Friedland.
"Friedland taught Steve the reality distortion field," said Kottke. "He
was charismatic andabit ofa con man andcould bendsituations to his

very strong will. He was mercurial, sure of himself, alittle dictatorial.
Steve admired that, and hebecame more like that after spending time
with Robert."

Jobs also absorbed how Friedland made himself the center of at
tention. "Robert was very much an outgoing, charismatic guy, a real
salesman," Kottke recalled. "When I first met Steve he was shy and
self-effacing, avery private guy. I think Robert taught him alot about
selling, about coming out ofhis shell, ofopening up and taking charge
ofa situation." Friedland projected a high-wattage aura. "He would
walk into a room and you would instantly notice him. Steve was the

absolute opposite when he came to Reed. After he spent time with
Robert, some of it started to rub off."

On Sunday evenings Jobs and Friedland would go to the Hare
Krishna temple on the western edge ofPortland, often with Kottke
and Holmes in tow. They would dance and sing songs at the top of
their lungs. "We would work ourselves into an ecstatic frenzy," Holmes
recalled. "Robert would go insane and dance like crazy. Steve was more

subdued, as if he was embarrassed to let loose." Then they would be
treated to paper plates piled high with vegetarian food.
Friedland had stewardship of a 220-acre apple farm, about forty
miles southwest of Portland, that was owned by an eccentric million
aire uncle from Switzerland named Marcel Miiller. After Friedland

The Dropout

39

became involved with Eastern spirituality, he turned it into acommune
called the All One Farm, and Jobs would spend weekends there with

Kottke, Holmes, and like-minded seekers ofenlightenment. The farm
had a main house, a large barn, and a garden shed, where Kottke and

Holmes slept. Jobs took on the task ofpruning the Gravenstein apple
trees. "Steve ran the apple orchard," said Friedland. "We were in the

organic cider business. Steve's job was to lead acrew offreaks to prune
the orchard and whip it back into shape."

Monks and disciples from the Hare Krishna temple would come
and prepare vegetarian feasts redolent of cumin, coriander, and tur
meric. "Steve would be starving when he arrived, and he would stuff

himself," Holmes recalled. "Then he would go and purge. For years I
thought he was bulimic. It was very upsetting, because we had gone
to all that trouble of creating these feasts, and he couldn't hold it
down."

Jobs was also beginning to have alittle trouble stomaching Fried
land's cult leader style. "Perhaps he saw a little bittoo much ofRobert

in himself," said Kottke. Although the commune was supposed to be a
refuge from materialism, Friedland began operating it more as a busi
ness; his followers were told to chop and sell firewood, make apple
presses and wood stoves, and engage in other commercial endeavors

for which they were not paid. One night Jobs slept under the table in
the kitchen and was amused to notice that people kept coming in and
stealing each other's food from the refrigerator. Communal economics
were not for him. "It started to get very materialistic," Jobs recalled.

"Everybody got the idea they were working very hard for Robert's
farm, and one by one they started to leave. I got pretty sick ofit."
Many years later, after Friedland had become abillionaire copper
and gold mining executive—working out ofVancouver, Singapore, and
Mongolia—I met him for drinks in New York. That evening I emailed
Jobs and mentioned my encounter. He telephoned me from California
within an hour and warned me against listening to Friedland. He said
that when Friedland was in trouble because of environmental abuses

committed by some ofhis mines, he had tried to contact Jobs to in

tervene with Bill Clinton, butJobs had not responded. "Robert always
portrayed himself as a spiritual person, but he crossed the line from

40

Walter Isaacson

being charismatic to being a con man," Jobs said. "It was a strange
thing to have one ofthe spiritual people in your young life turn out to
be, symbolically and in reality, a gold miner."
. . . Drop Out

Jobs quickly became bored with college. He liked being at Reed, just
not taking the required classes. Infact he was surprised when he found
outthat, for all ofits hippie aura, there were strict course requirements.
When Wozniak came to visit, Jobs waved his schedule at him and

complained, "They are making me take all these courses." Woz replied,
"Yes, that's what they do in college." Jobs refused to go to the classes
he was assigned and instead went to the ones he wanted, such as a
dance class where he could enjoy both the creativity and the chance
to meet girls. "Iwould never have refused totake the courses you were

supposed to, that's adifference in our personality," Wozniak marveled.
Jobs also began to feel guilty, he later said, about spending so much
ofhis parents' money on an education that did not seem worthwhile.
"All ofmy working-class parents' savings were being spent on my col
lege tuition," he recounted in a famous commencement address at
Stanford. "I had no idea whatI wanted to do with mylife and no idea

how college was going to help me figure itout. And here I was spend
ing all ofthe money my parents had saved their entire life. So I decided
to drop out and trust that itwould all work out okay."
Hedidn't actually want toleave Reed; he just wanted toquit paying

tuition and taking classes that didn't interest him. Remarkably, Reed
tolerated that. "He had a very inquiring mind that was enormously
attractive," said the dean of students, Jack Dudman. "He refused to

accept automatically received truths, and he wanted to examine every

thing himself." Dudman allowed Jobs to audit classes and stay with
friends in the dorms even afterhe stopped paying tuition.

"The minute I dropped out I could stop taking the required classes
that didn't interest me, and begin dropping in on the ones that looked
interesting," he said. Among them was acalligraphy class that appealed
to him after he saw posters on campus that were beautifully drawn. "I

The Dropout

41

learned about serif and sans serif typefaces, about varying the amount
ofspace between different letter combinations, about what makes great
typography great. Itwas beautiful, historical, artistically subtle inaway
that science cant capture, and I found it fascinating."
It was yet another example ofJobs consciously positioning himself
at the intersection of the arts and technology. In all of his products,
technology would be married togreat design, elegance, human touches,
and even romance. He would be in the fore ofpushing friendly graphi
cal user interfaces. The calligraphy course would become iconic in that

regard. "IfI had never dropped in on that single course in college, the
Mac would have never had multiple typefaces or proportionally spaced
fonts. And since Windows just copied the Mac, its likely that no per
sonal computer would have them."

Inthe meantime Jobs eked out abohemian existence on the fringes
of Reed. He went barefoot most of the time, wearing sandals when
it snowed. Elizabeth Holmes made meals for him, trying to keep up
with his obsessive diets. He returned soda bottles for spare change,
continued his treks to the free Sunday dinners at the Hare Krishna

temple, and wore a down jacket in the heatless garage apartment he
rented for $20 a month. When he needed money, he found work at

the psychology department lab maintaining the electronic equipment
that was used for animal behavior experiments. Occasionally Chrisann
Brennan would come to visit. Their relationship sputtered along errati
cally. But mostly he tended to the stirrings ofhis own soul and personal
quest for enlightenment.

"I came ofage at a magical time," hereflected later. "Ourconscious
ness was raised by Zen, and also byLSD." Even laterin life he would

credit psychedelic drugs for making him more enlightened. "Taking
LSD was aprofound experience, one ofthe most important things in
my life. LSD shows you that there's another side to the coin, and you
cant remember it when it wears off, but you know it. It reinforced my
sense ofwhat was important—creating great things instead ofmaking
money, putting things back into the stream of history and of human
consciousness as much as I could."

CHAPTER

FOUR

ATARI AND INDIA
Zen and the Art of Game Design

Atari

In February 1974, after eighteen months of hanging around Reed,
Jobs decided to move back to his parents' home inLos Altos and look
for ajob. It was not a difficult search. Atpeak times during the 1970s,
the classified section of the San Jose Mercury carried up to sixty pages

oftechnology help-wanted ads. One ofthose caught Jobs's eye. "Have
fun, make money," it said. That day Jobs walked into the lobby ofthe
video game manufacturer Atari and told the personnel director, who
was startled by his unkempt hair and attire, that he wouldn't leave
until theygave him ajob.

Atari's founder was a burly entrepreneur named Nolan Bushnell,
who was a charismatic visionary with a nice touch of showmanship
in him—in other words, another role model waiting to be emulated.
After he became famous, he liked driving around in a Rolls, smoking

dope, and holding staff meetings in ahot tub. As Friedland had done
and as Jobs would learn to do, he was able to turn charm into a cun

ning force, to cajole and intimidate and distort reality with the power
ofhis personality. His chief engineer was Al Alcorn, beefy and jovial
and abitmore grounded, the house grown-up trying toimplement the
42

Atari andIndia

43

vision and curb theenthusiasms ofBushnell. Their big hit thus far was

avideo game called Pong, inwhich two players tried to volley ablip on
a screen with two movable lines that acted as paddles. (Ifyou're under
thirty, askyour parents.)

WhenJobs arrived inthe Atari lobby wearing sandals and demand
ing ajob, Alcorn was the one who was summoned. "I was told, 'We've
got a hippie kid in the lobby. He says he's not going to leave until we

hire him. Should we call the cops or let him in?' I said bring him on in!"
Jobs thus became one ofthe first fifty employees atAtari, working
as a technician for $5 an hour. "In retrospect, it was weird to hire a

dropout from Reed," Alcorn recalled. "But I saw something inhim. He
was very intelligent, enthusiastic, excited about tech." Alcorn assigned
him to work with a straitlaced engineer named Don Lang. The next
day Lang complained, "This guy's a goddamn hippie with b.o. Why
did you do this to me? And he's impossible to deal with." Jobs clung
to the beliefthat his fruit-heavy vegetarian diet would prevent not just
mucus but also body odor, even if he didn't use deodorant or shower
regularly. It was a flawed theory.
Lang and others wanted to letJobs go, but Bushnell worked out a
solution. "The smell and behavior wasn't an issue with me," he said.

"Steve was prickly, but I kind ofliked him. So I asked him to go on the
night shift. It was away to save him." Jobs would come in after Lang
and others had left and work through most of the night. Even thus
isolated, he became knownfor his brashness. On those occasions when

he happened to interact with others, he was prone to informing them
that they were "dumb shits." In retrospect, he stands by that judgment.
"The only reason I shone was that everyone else was so bad," Jobs
recalled.

Despite his arrogance (or perhaps because of it) he was able to

charm Atari's boss. "He was more philosophical than the other people
I workedwith," Bushnell recalled. "We used to discuss free will versus

determinism. I tended to believe that things were much more deter
mined, that we were programmed. If we had perfect information, we
could predict people's actions. Steve felt the opposite." That outlook
accorded with his faith inthe power ofthe will to bend reality.

Jobs helped improve some ofthe games by pushing the chips to

44

Walter Isaacson

produce fun designs, and Bushnell's inspiring willingness to play byhis
own rules rubbed off on him. In addition, he intuitively appreciated

the simplicity ofAtari's games. They came with no manual and needed
tobeuncomplicated enough that astoned freshman could figure them
out. The only instructions for Atari's Star Trek game were "1. Insert
quarter. 2. Avoid Klingons."
Not all of his coworkers shunned Jobs. He became friends with

Ron Wayne, a draftsman at Atari, who had earlier started a company
that built slot machines. It subsequently failed, but Jobs became fas
cinated with the idea that it was possible to start your own company.

"Ron was an amazing guy," said Jobs. "He started companies. I had
never metanybody like that." He proposed toWayne that they go into
business together; Jobs said he could borrow $50,000, and they could

design and market aslot machine. ButWayne had already been burned
in business, so he declined. "I said that was the quickest way to lose

$50,000," Wayne recalled, "but I admired the fact that he had aburn
ingdrive to start his own business."
One weekend Jobs was visiting Wayne at his apartment, engaging

as they often did in philosophical discussions, when Wayne said that
there was something he needed totell him. "Yeah, I think I know what
it is," Jobs replied. "I think you like men." Wayne said yes. "Itwas my
first encounter with someone who I knewwas gay," Jobs recalled. "He

planted the right perspective of it for me." Jobs grilled him: "When
you see abeautiful woman, what do you feel?" Wayne replied, "It's like
when you look at abeautiful horse. You can appreciate it, but you don't
want to sleep with it. You appreciate beauty for what it is." Wayne
said thatit is atestament toJobs that he felt like revealing this to him.

"Nobody at Atari knew, and I could count on mytoes and fingers the
number of people I told in my whole life. But I guess it just felt right
to tell him,that he would understand, and it didn't have any effect on
our relationship."

Atari and In dia

45

India

One reason Jobs was eager tomake some money inearly 1974 was that
Robert Friedland, who had gone to India the summer before, was urg
inghim to take his own spiritual journey there. Friedland had studied

in India with Neem Karoli Baba (Maharaj-ji), who had been the guru
to much of the sixties hippie movement. Jobs decided he should do

the same, and he recruited Daniel Kottke togo with him. Jobs was not
motivated bymere adventure. "For me it was a serious search," he said.

"I'd been turned on to the idea ofenlightenment and trying to figure
out who I was and how I fit into things." Kottke adds that Jobs's quest
seemed driven partly by not knowing his birth parents. "There was a
hole in him, andhewas trying to fill it."

When Jobs told the folks atAtari that he was quitting to go search
for a guru in India, the jovial Alcorn was amused. "He comes in and

stares at me and declares, I'm going to find my guru,' and I say, 'No

shit, that's super. Write me!' And he says he wants me to help pay, and
I tell him, 'Bullshit!' "Then Alcorn had an idea. Atari was making kits
and shipping them to Munich, where they were built into finished
machines and distributed by a wholesaler in Turin. But there was a

problem: Because the games were designed for the American rate of

sixty frames per second, there were frustrating interference problems
inEurope, where the rate was fifty frames per second. Alcorn sketched

out afix with Jobs and then offered to pay for him to go to Europe to
implement it."It's gottobe cheaper togettoIndia from there," hesaid.

Jobs agreed. So Alcorn sent him on his way with the exhortation, "Say
hi to your guru for me."
Jobs spent a few days in Munich, where he solved the interference
problem, but in the process he flummoxed the dark-suited German
managers. They complained to Alcorn that he dressed and smelled like

a bum and behaved rudely. "I said, 'Did he solve the problem?' And
they said, 'Yeah.' I said, 'Ifyou got any more problems, you just call
me, I got more guys justlike him!' They said, 'No, no we'll take care

ofit next time.'" For his part, Jobs was upset that the Germans kept

46

Walter Isaacson

trying to feed him meat and potatoes. "They don't even have a word
for vegetarian," he complained (incorrecdy) ina phone call toAlcorn.
He had a better time when he took the train to see the distribu

tor in Turin, where the Italian pastas and his host's camaraderie were

more simpatico. "Ihad awonderful couple ofweeks inTurin, which is
this charged-up industrial town," he recalled. "The distributor took me
every night to dinner at this place where there were only eight tables
and no menu. You'd just tell them what you wanted, and they made it.
One of the tables was on reserve for the chairman of Fiat. It was really

super." He next went to Lugano, Switzerland, where he stayed with
Friedland's uncle, and from there took a flight to India.

When he got offthe plane inNew Delhi, he felt waves ofheat ris
ing from the tarmac, even though itwas only April. He had been given
the name of a hotel, but it was foil, so he went to one his taxi driver

insisted was good. "I'm sure he was getting some baksheesh, because
he took me to this complete dive." Jobs asked the owner whether the
water was filtered and foolishly believed the answer. "I got dysentery

pretty fast. I was sick, really sick, a really high fever. I dropped from
160 pounds to 120 in about aweek."

Once he got healthy enough to move, he decided that he needed
to get out ofDelhi. So he headed to the town ofHaridwar, inwestern
India near thesource oftheGanges, which was having afestival known
asthe Kumbh Mela. Morethan ten million people poured into a town

that usually contained fewer than 100,000 residents. "There were holy
men all around. Tents with this teacher and that teacher. There were

people riding elephants, you name it. I was there for afew days, but I
decided that I needed to get out of there too."

He went by train and bus to avillage near Nainital inthe foothills
ofthe Himalayas. That was where Neem Karoli Baba lived, or had
lived. By the time Jobs got there, he was no longer alive, at least in the
same incarnation. Jobs rented aroom with a mattress onthe floor from

a family who helped him recuperate by feeding him vegetarian meals.
"There was a copy there ofAutobiography ofa Yogi in English that a
previous traveler had left, and I read it several times because there
was not a lot to do, and I walked around from village to village andre-

Atari and In dia

47

covered from my dysentery." Among those who were part ofthe com

munity there was Larry Brilliant, an epidemiologist who was working
to eradicate smallpox and who later ran Google's philanthropic arm
and the Skoll Foundation. Hebecame Jobs's lifelong friend.
At one point Jobs was told ofa young Hindu holy man who was
holding agathering ofhis followers at the Himalayan estate ofawealthy
businessman. "It was a chance to meet a spiritual being and hang out
with his followers, but itwas also achance to have agood meal. I could
smell the food as we got near, and I was very hungry." As Jobs was eat
ing, the holy man—who was not much older than Jobs—picked him
out ofthe crowd, pointed at him, and began laughing maniacally. "He
came running over and grabbed me and made a tooting sound and

said, 'You are just like a baby,'" recalled Jobs. "I was not relishing this
attention." Taking Jobs by the hand, he led him out ofthe worshipful
crowd and walked him up to a hill, where there was a well and a small

pond. "We sit down and he pulls out this straight razor. I'm thinking
he's a nutcase and begin to worry. Then he pulls out a bar ofsoap—
I had long hair at the time—and he lathered up my hair and shaved my
head. He told me thathewas saving my health."
Daniel Kottke arrived inIndia atthe beginning ofthe summer, and

Jobs went back to New Delhi to meet him. They wandered, mainly by
bus, rather aimlessly. By this point Jobs was no longer trying to find
aguru who could impart wisdom, but instead was seeking enlighten
ment through ascetic experience, deprivation, and simplicity. He was
not able to achieve inner calm. Kottke remembers him getting into a

furious shouting match with aHindu woman in avillage marketplace
who, Jobs alleged, had been watering down the milk she was selling
them.

Yet Jobs could also be generous. When they got to the town of
Manali, Kottke's sleeping bag was stolen with his traveler's checks in it.

"Steve covered my food expenses and bus ticket back toDelhi," Kottke
recalled. He also gave Kottke the rest ofhis own money, $100, to tide
him over.

During his seven months in India, he had written to his parents
only sporadically, getting mail atthe American Express office in New

48

Walter Isaacson

Delhi when he passed through, and so they were somewhat surprised
when they gota call from the Oakland airport asking them to pick him
up. They immediately drove up from Los Altos. "My head had been
shaved, I was wearing Indian cotton robes, and my skin had turned a
deep, chocolate brown-red from the sun," he recalled. "So I'm sitting
there and my parents walked past me about five times and finally my
mother came up and said 'Steve?' and I said 'Hi!'"
They took him back home, where he continued trying to find
himself. It was a pursuit with many paths toward enlightenment. In
the mornings and evenings hewould meditate and study Zen, and in
between he would drop in to audit physics or engineering courses at
Stanford.

The Search

Jobs's interest in Eastern spirituality, Hinduism, Zen Buddhism, and
the search for enlightenment was not merely the passing phase of a
nineteen-year-old. Throughout his life he would seek to follow many
ofthebasic precepts ofEastern religions, such as the emphasis on ex
perientialprajna, wisdom or cognitive understanding that is intuitively
experienced through concentration ofthe mind. Years later, sitting in
his Palo Alto garden, he reflected on the lasting influence of his trip
to India:

Coming back toAmerica was, for me, much more ofa cultural shock
than going toIndia. The people inthe Indian countryside don't use their
intellect like we do, they use their intuition instead, and theirintuition
is far more developed than in the rest of the world. Intuition is a very

powerful thing, more powerful than intellect, in my opinion. That's had
a big impacton mywork.

Western rational thought is notaninnate human characteristic; it is

learned and is the great achievement ofWestern civilization. In the vil
lages ofIndia, they never learned it. They learned something else, which
isinsome ways justas valuable butinother ways isnot. That's thepower
of intuitionand experiential wisdom.

Atari and India

49

Coming back after seven months in Indian villages, I saw the craziness of theWestern world as well as itscapacity for rational thought. If
you justsitandobserve, you will see how restless your mind is. If you try
to calmit, it only makes it worse, but overtime it does calm,and when

it does, there's room to hear more subtle things—that's when your intu
ition starts to blossom andyou startto see things more clearly andbein
the present more. Your mind justslows down, andyou see a tremendous
expanse in the moment. You see so much more than you could see be
fore. It's a discipline; you have to practice it.
Zen has been a deep influence in my life ever since. At one point
I was thinking about going toJapan and trying to getinto the Eihei-ji
monastery, but myspiritual advisor urged meto stay here. He said there
is nothing over there that isn't here, and he was correct. I learned the

truth of the Zen saying thatifyou are willing to travel around theworld
to meet a teacher, one willappear nextdoor.

Jobs did infact find ateacher right inhis own neighborhood. Shunryu Suzuki, who wrote Zen Mind, Beginners Mind and ran the San
Francisco Zen Center, used to come to Los Altos every Wednesday
evening to lecture andmeditate with a small group of followers. After
a while he asked his assistant, Kobun Chino Otogawa, to open a fulltime center there. Jobs became a faithful follower, along withhis occa
sional girlfriend, Chrisann Brennan, and Daniel Kottke and Elizabeth

Holmes. He also began to go by himself on retreats to the Tassajara
Zen Center, a monastery near Carmel where Kobun also taught.
Kottke found Kobun amusing. "His English was atrocious," he re
called. "He would speak in a kind of haiku, with poetic, suggestive
phrases. We would sit and listen to him, and half the time we had no

idea what he was going on about. I took the whole thing as a kind of
lighthearted interlude." Holmes was more into the scene. "We would
go to Kobuns meditations, sit on zafu cushions, and he would sit on
a dais," she said. "We learned how to tune out distractions. It was a

magical thing. One evening we were meditating with Kobun when it
was raining, and he taught us how to use ambient sounds to bring us
back to focus on our meditation."

As for Jobs, his devotion was intense. "He became really serious and

50

Walter Isaacson

self-important and just generally unbearable," according to Kottke.
He began meeting with Kobun almost daily, and every few months
they went on retreats together to meditate. "I ended up spending as
much time as I could with him," Jobs recalled. "He had a wife who
was a nurse at Stanford and two kids. She worked the night shift, so

I would go over and hang out with him in the evenings. She would
get home about midnight and shoo me away." They sometimes dis
cussed whether Jobs should devote himselffully to spiritual pursuits,
but Kobuncounseled otherwise. He assured Jobs that he couldkeep in

touch withhisspiritual side while working in a business. The relation
ship turned out to be lasting and deep; seventeen years later Kobun
wouldperform Jobs's wedding ceremony.
Jobs's compulsive search forself-awareness also ledhim to undergo
primal scream therapy, which had recently been developed and popu
larized bya Los Angeles psychotherapist named Arthur Janov. It was
based on the Freudian theory that psychological problems are caused
by the repressed pains of childhood; Janov argued that they could be
resolved by re-suffering these primal moments while fiilly expressing
the pain—sometimes in screams. To Jobs, this seemed preferable to
talk therapy because it involved intuitive feeling and emotional action
rather than just rational analyzing. "This was not something to think
about," he later said. "This was something to do: to close your eyes,

hold your breath,jump in, and come out the other end more insightful."
A group of Janov's adherents ran a program called the Oregon
Feeling Center in an old hotel in Eugene thatwas managed byJobs's
Reed College guru Robert Friedland, whose All One Farm commune
was nearby. In late 1974, Jobs signed up for a twelve-week course of
therapy there costing $1,000. "Steve and I were both into personal
growth, so I wanted to go with him," Kottke recounted, "but I couldn't
afford it."

Jobs confided to close friends that he was driven by the pain he
was feeling about being put up for adoption and not knowing about
his birth parents. "Steve had avery profound desire to know his physi
cal parents so he could better know himself," Friedland later said. He
had learned from Paul and ClaraJobs that his birth parents had both

Ata ri and In dia

51

been graduate students at a university and that his father might be
Syrian. He had even thought about hiring a private investigator, but
he decided not to do so for the time being. "I didn't want to hurt my
parents," he recalled, referring to Paul and Clara.

"Hewas struggling with thefact thathehadbeen adopted," accord
ing to Elizabeth Holmes. "He felt that it was an issue that he needed

to get hold of emotionally." Jobs admitted as much to her. "This is
something that is bothering me, and I need to focus on it," he said.

He was even more open with Greg Calhoun. "Hewas doing a lot of
soul-searching about beingadopted, and he talked about it with me a
lot," Calhoun recalled. "The primal scream andthe mucusless diets, he
was tryingto cleanse himself and get deeper into his frustration about
his birth. He told me he was deeply angry about the fact that he had
been givenup."

John Lennon had undergone the same primal scream therapy in
1970, and in December of that year he released the song "Mother"
with the Plastic Ono Band. It dealt with Lennon's own feehngs about
a father who had abandoned him and a mother who had been killed

when he was a teenager. The refrain includes the haunting chant
"Mama don't go, Daddy come home."Jobs used to play thesong often.
Jobs later said that Janov's teachings did not prove very useful.
"He offered a ready-made, buttoned-down answer which turned out

to be far too oversimplistic. It became obvious that it was not going
to yield any great insight." But Holmes contended that it made

him more confident: "After he did it, he was in a different place. He
had a very abrasive personality, but there was a peace about him for a
while. His confidence improved and his feelings of inadequacy were
reduced."

Jobs came to believe thathecould impart thatfeeling ofconfidence
to others and thus push them to do things they hadn't thought pos
sible. Holmes had broken up with Kottke and joined a religious cult
in San Francisco that expected her to sever ties with all past friends.
ButJobs rejected that injunction. He arrived at the cult house in his

Ford Ranchero one day and announced that he was driving up to
Friedland's apple farm and she was to come. Even more brazenly, he

52

Walter Isaacson

said she would have to drive part of the way, even though she didn't
know how to use the stick shift."Once we got on the open road, he
made meget behind the wheel, andhe shifted the caruntilwe got up
to 55 miles per hour," she recalled. "Thenhe putson a tapeof Dylan's
Blood on the Tracks, lays his head in mylap, and goes to sleep. He had
the attitude that he could do anything, and therefore so can you. He

puthis Ufe in my hands. So thatmade me dosomething I didn't think
I could do."

It was the brighter side of whatwould become known as his real
itydistortion field. "Ifyou trust him, you can do things," Holmes said.
"If he's decided that something should happen, then he's just going to
make it happen."

Breakout

One day in early 1975 AlAlcorn was sitting in his office atAtari when
Ron Wayne burst in."Hey, Stevie isback!" he shouted.
"Wow, bringhim on in," Alcorn replied.
Jobsshuffled in barefoot, wearing a saffron robeand carrying a copy
of BeHere Now, whichhe handedto Alcornand insistedhe read. "Can
I have myjob back?" he asked.
"He looked like a Hare Krishna guy, but it was great to see him,"
Alcorn recalled. "So I said, sure!"

Once again, for the sake ofharmony, Jobs worked mostly at night.
Wozniak, who was Hving in an apartment nearby andworking at HP,
would come by after dinner to hang outand play thevideo games. He
hadbecome addicted to Pong at a Sunnyvale bowling alley, andhe was
able to builda version that he hooked up to his homeTV set.

One day in the late summer of 1975, Nolan Bushnell, defying the
prevailing wisdom that paddle games were over, decided to develop
a single-player version of Pong; instead of competing against an op

ponent, the player would volley the ball into a wall that lost a brick
whenever it was hit. He calledJobs into his office, sketched it out on
his little blackboard, and asked him to design it. There would be a

Atari and India

53

bonus, Bushnell told him, for every chip fewer thanfifty that he used.
Bushnell knew thatJobs was not a great engineer, but he assumed, correcdy, thathewould recruit Wozniak, who was always hanging around.
"I looked at it as a two-for-one thing," Bushnell recalled. "Woz was a
better engineer."

Wozniak was thrilled when Jobs asked him to help and proposed
splitting the fee. "This was the most wonderful offer in my life, to
actually design a game that people would use," he recalled. Jobs said it

had to be done in four days and with the fewest chips possible. What
he hid from Wozniak was that the deadline was onethatJobs had im

posed, because he needed to get to the All One Farm to help prepare
for the apple harvest. He also didn't mention that there was a bonus

tied to keeping down the number ofchips.
"A game like this might take most engineers a few months,"
Wozniak recalled. "I thought that there was no way I could do it, but

Steve made me sure that I could." So he stayed up four nights in a row
and did it. During the day at HP, Wozniak would sketch out his de

sign onpaper. Then, after a fast-food meal, hewould go right to Atari
and stay all night. As Wozniak churned out the design, Jobs sat on a
bench to his left implementing it by wire-wrapping the chips onto a
breadboard. "While Steve was breadboarding, I spent time playing my
favorite game ever, which was the auto racing game Gran Trak 10,"
Wozniak said.

Astonishingly, they were able toget the job done in four days, and
Wozniak used only forty-five chips. Recollections differ, but by most
accounts Jobs simply gave Wozniak half of the base fee and not the

bonus Bushnell paid for saving five chips. It would be another ten years
before Wozniak discovered (by being shown the tale in a book on the
history ofAtari titled Zap) thatJobs had been paid this bonus. "I think
that Steve needed the money, and he just didn't tell me the truth,"

Wozniak later said. When he talks about it now, there are long pauses,
and he admits that it causes him pain. "Iwish he had just been honest.
If hehad told me he needed themoney, heshould have known I would

have just given it to him. He was a friend. You help your friends."
To Wozniak, it showed a fundamental difference in their characters.

54

Walter Isaacson

"Ethics always mattered to me, and I still don't understand why he
would've gottenpaidonethingand toldme he'd gottenpaidanother,"
he said. "But,you know, people aredifferent."
When Jobs learnedthis storywas published, he called Wozniak to
deny it."Hetoldmethat hedidn't remember doing it, andthat ifhe did
something like that hewould remember it, so he probably didn't do it,"
Wozniak recalled. When I asked Jobs directly, he became unusually
quiet and hesitant. "I don't know where that allegation comes from,"
he said. "I gave him halfthe money I ever got. That's howI've always
beenwith Woz. I mean, Woz stopped working in 1978. He never did
one ounce of work after 1978. And yet he got exacdy the same shares
of Apple stockthat I did."
Is it possible that memories are muddled and that Jobs did not, in
fact, shortchange Wozniak? "There's a chance that my memory is all
wrong and messed up," Wozniak told me, but after a pause he recon
sidered. "But no. I remember the details of this one, the $350 check."

He confirmed his memory with Nolan Bushnell and Al Alcorn. "I re
member talking about the bonus money to Woz, and he was upset,"
Bushnell said. "I said yes, there was a bonus for each chip they saved,
andhejust shook his head and then clucked his tongue."
Whatever the truth, Wozniak later insisted that it was not worth

rehashing. Jobs is a complex person, he said, and being manipulative
isjustthe darker facet ofthe traits thatmake him successful. Wozniak
would never have been that way, but as he points out, he also could
never have built Apple. "I would,rather let it pass," he said when I
pressed the point. "It's not something I want tojudge Steve by."
The Atari experience helped shape Jobs's approach to business and
design. He appreciated the user-friendliness of Atari's insert-quarteravoid-Klingons games. "That simplicity rubbed offon him and made
him a very focused product person," said Ron Wayne. Jobs also ab
sorbed some of Bushnell's take-no-prisoners attitude. "Nolan wouldn't
take no for an answer," according to Alcorn, "and thiswas Steve's first
impression ofhow things got done. Nolan was never abusive, like Steve
sometimes is. But he had the same driven attitude. It made me cringe,

Atari and India

55

but dammit, it got things done. In that way Nolan was a mentor for
Jobs."

Bushnell agreed. "There is something indefinable in an entrepre
neur, and I saw that in Steve," he said. "Hewas interested not just in
engineering, but also the business aspects. I taught him that if you act
Hke youcan do something, then it will work. I told him,Tretend to be
completely in control and people will assume that you are.'"

CHAPTER

FIVE

THE APPLE I
Turn On, Boot Up, Jack In

DanielKottke andJobs with the Apple I at
the Atlantic City computerfair, 1976

Machines ofLoving Grace
In San Francisco and the Santa Clara Valley during the late 1960s,
various cultural currents flowed together. There was the technology

revolution thatbegan with thegrowth ofmilitary contractors andsoon
included electronics firms, microchip makers, video game designers,

and computer companies. There was a hacker subculture—filled with
wireheads, phreakers, cyberpunks, hobbyists, and just plain geeks—
that included engineers who didn't conform to the HP mold and their
56

TheAppleI

51

kids whoweren't attunedto the wavelengths of the subdivisions. There
were quasi-academic groups doing studies on the effects of LSD; par
ticipants included Doug Engelbart of the Augmentation Research
Center in Palo Alto, who later helped develop the computer mouse
and graphical user interfaces, and Ken Kesey, who celebrated the drug
with music-and-light shows featuring a house band that became the
Grateful Dead. There was the hippie movement, born out of the Bay
Area's beatgeneration, andthe rebeUious poUtical activists, bornout of
the FreeSpeech Movement at Berkeley. Overlaid on it aU werevarious
self-fulfiUment movements pursuing paths to personal enUghtenment:
Zen and Hinduism, meditation and yoga, primal scream and sensory
deprivation, Esalen and est.
This fusion of flower power and processor power, enUghtenment
and technology, was embodied by Steve Jobs as he meditated in the
mornings, audited physics classes at Stanford, worked nights at Atari,
and dreamed of starting his own business. "There was just something
going on here," he said, looking back at the time and place. "The best
music came from here—the Grateful Dead,Jefferson Airplane, Joan
Baez, Janis JopUn—and so did the integrated circuit, and things Uke
the Whole Earth Catalog?
InitiaUy the technologists and the hippies did not interface weU.
Manyin the counterculture saw computers as ominous and OrweUian,
the province of the Pentagon and the power structure. In The Myth
ofthe Machine, the historian Lewis Mumford warned that computers
were sucking away ourfreedom anddestroying "Ufe-enhancing values."
An injunction on punch cards ofthe period—"Do not fold, spindle or
mutilate"—became an ironic phrase of the antiwar Left.
But by the early 1970s a shift was under way. "Computing went

from being dismissed as a tool of bureaucratic control to being em
braced as a symbol of individual expression and Uberation," John Markoffwrote in his study of the counterculture's convergence with the
computer industry, What the Dormouse Said. It was an ethos lyricaUy

expressed in Richard Brautigan's 1967 poem, "AU Watched Over by
Machines of Loving Grace," and the cyberdeUc fusion was certified
when Timothy Leary declared that personal computers had become
the new LSD and years later revised his famous mantra to proclaim,

58

Walter Isaacson

"Turn on, boot up, jack in."The musician Bono, who later became a
friend of Jobs, often discussed with him why those immersed in the
rock-drugs-rebel counterculture of the Bay Area ended up helping to
create the personal computer industry. "The people who invented the
twenty-first century were pot-smoking, sandal-wearing hippies from
the West CoastUke Steve, because theysaw differently," he said. "The
hierarchical systems of the East Coast, England, Germany, and Japan
do not encourage this different thinking. The sixties produced an anar
chicmind-setthat is greatfor imagining a worldnot yet in existence."
One person who encouraged the denizens of the countercul
ture to make common cause with the hackers was Stewart Brand. A

puckish visionary who generated fun and ideas over many decades,
Brand was a participant in one of the early sixties LSD studies in
Palo Alto. He joined with his feUow subject Ken Kesey to produce
the acid-celebrating Trips Festival, appeared in the opening scene of
Tom Wolfe's The Electric Kool-AidAcid Test, and worked with Doug

Engelbart to create a seminal sound-and-Ught presentation of new
technologies caUed the MotherofAU Demos. "Mostofourgeneration
scorned computers as the embodiment of centraUzed control," Brand
later noted. "But a tiny contingent—later caUed hackers—embraced
computers and set about transforming them into tools of Uberation.
That turned out to be the true royal road to the future."
Brand ran the Whole Earth Truck Store, which began as a roving
truck that sold useful tools and educational materials, and in 1968 he

decided to extend its reach with the Whole Earth Catalog. On its first
cover was the famous picture of Earth taken from space; its subtitle
was "Access to Tools." The underlying phUosophy was that technology
couldbe our friend. Brand wrote on the first page of the first edition,
"Arealm of intimate,personal power is developing—power of the in
dividual to conducthis own education, find his own inspiration, shape
his own environment, and share his adventure with whoever is inter

ested. Tools that aidthisprocess are sought andpromoted bythe Whole
Earth Catalog." Buckminster FuUer foUowed with a poem that began:
"I see God in the instruments and mechanisms that work reUably."
Jobs became a Whole Earth fan. He was particularly taken by the
final issue, which came out in 1971,when he was stiU in high school,

TheAppleI

59

and he broughtit with him to coUege and then to the AU One Farm.
"Ontheback cover oftheirfinal issue"Jobs recaUed, "was a photograph
of an early morning country road, the kind you might find yourself
hitchhiking on if you were so adventurous. Beneath it were the words:

'Stay Hungry. Stay FooUsh.'" Brand sees Jobs as one of the purest
embodiments of the cultural mix that the catalog sought to celebrate.
"Steve is right at the nexus of the counterculture and technology," he
said."He got the notion of tools for human use."

Brand's catalog was published withthe help ofthe Portola Institute,
a foundation dedicated to the fledgUng field of computer education.

The foundation also helped launch the People's Computer Company,
which was not a company at all but a newsletter and organization with
the motto "Computer power to the people." There were occasional
Wednesday-night potiuck dinners, and two of the regulars, Gordon
French and Fred Moore, decided to create a more formal club where

news about personal electronics couldbe shared.

They were energized by the arrival of the January 1975 issue of
Popular Mechanics, which had on its cover the first personal computer
kit, the Altair. The Altair wasn't much—just a $495 pile of parts that
had tobe soldered toaboard that would then do little—but for hobby
ists and hackers it heralded the dawn of a new era. BiU Gates and Paul

AUen read the magazine and started working on a version of BASIC,
an easy-to-use programming language, forthe Altair. It also caughtthe
attention ofJobs and Wozniak. And when an Altair kit arrived at the

People's Computer Company, it became the centerpiece for the first
meeting of the club that French and Moore had decided to launch.

The Homebrew Computer Club
The group became known as the Homebrew Computer Club, and it
encapsulated the Whole Earth fusion between the counterculture and

technology. It would become to the personal computer era something
akin to what theTurk's Head coffeehouse was to the age ofDr. John
son, a place where ideas were exchanged and disseminated. Moore
wrote the flyer for the first meeting, heldon March5,1975,in French's

60

Walter Isaacson

Menlo Park garage: "Are you buUding your own computer? Terminal,
TV, typewriter?" it asked. "If so,you might like to come to a gathering
of people with Uke-minded interests."
AUen Baum spotted the flyer on the HP buUetin board and caUed
Wozniak, who agreed to go with him. "That night turned out to be
oneof the mostimportant nights of myUfe," Wozniak recaUed. About
thirty other people showed up, spiUing out of French's open garage
door, and theytookturnsdescribing theirinterests. Wozniak, wholater
admitted to being extremely nervous, said he Uked "video games, pay
movies for hotels, scientific calculator design, andTV terminal design,"
according to the minutes prepared byMoore. There was a demonstra
tion of the newAltair, but more important to Wozniakwas seeing the
specification sheet for a microprocessor.
As he thoughtabout the microprocessor—a chipthat had an entire
central processing unit on it—he had an insight. He had been design
ing a terminal, with a keyboard and monitor, that would connect to a
distant minicomputer. Using a microprocessor, he could put some of

the capacity ofthe minicomputer inside the terminal itself, so it could
become a smaU stand-alone computer on a desktop. It was an endur
ingidea: keyboard, screen, and computer aU in one integrated personal
package. "This whole vision of a personal computer just popped into
my head," he said. "That night, I started to sketch out on paper what
wouldlater become known as the AppleI."

At first he planned to use the same microprocessor that was in the
Altair, an Intel 8080. But each of those "cost almost more than my

monthly rent," so he looked for an alternative. He found one in the
Motorola 6800, which a friend at HP was able to get for $40 apiece.

Then he discovered a chip made byMOSTechnologies that was electronicaUy the same but cost only $20. It would make his machine af
fordable, but it would carry a long-term cost. Intel's chips ended up
becoming the industry standard, which would haunt Apple when its
computers were incompatible with it.
After work each day, Wozniak would gohome for aTV dinner and
then return to HP to moonUght on his computer. He spread out the
parts in his cubicle, figured out their placement, and soldered them
onto his motherboard. Then he began writingthe software that would

The Apple I

61

get the microprocessor to display images on the screen. Because he

could not afford to pay for computer time, he wrote the code by hand.
After a couple ofmonths he was ready to test it. "I typed a few keys
on the keyboard and I was shocked! The letters were displayed on the
screen." It was Sunday, June 29, 1975, a milestone for the personal
computer. "Itwas thefirst time in history," Wozniak later said, "anyone
had typed a character on a keyboard and seen it show up on their own
computer's screen right in front of them."

Jobs was impressed. He peppered Wozniak with questions: Could
the computer ever be networked? Was it possible to add a disk for
memory storage? He also began to help Wozget components. Particu
larly important were the dynamic random-access memory chips. Jobs
made a few caUs and was able to score some from Intel for free. "Steve

isjust that sort of person," said Wozniak. "I mean, he knewhow to talk
to a sales representative. I could never have done that.I'm too shy."

Jobs began to accompany Wozniak to Homebrew meetings, carry
ing the TV monitor and helping to set things up. The meetings now
attracted more than one hundred enthusiasts and had been moved to

the auditorium of the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center. Presiding
with a pointer and a free-form manner was Lee Felsenstein, another

embodiment of the merger between the world of computing and the
counterculture. He was an engineering school dropout, a participant
in the Free Speech Movement, and an antiwar activist. He had writ

ten for the alternative newspaper Berkeley Barb and then gone backto
being a computer engineer.
Wozwas usuaUy too shy to talkin the meetings, but people would
gather around his machine afterward, and he would proudly show off
his progress. Moore had tried to instiU in the Homebrew an ethos
of swapping and sharing rather than commerce. "The theme of the
club," Woz said, "was 'Give to help others.'" It was an expression of
the hacker ethic that information should befree and aU authority mis
trusted. "I designed the Apple I because I wanted to give it away for
free to other people," saidWozniak.
This was not an outlook that BiU Gates embraced. After he

and Paul AUen had completed their BASIC interpreter for the Al
tair, Gates was appaUed that members of the Homebrew were mak-

62

Walter Isaacson

ing copies ofit and sharing it without paying him. So he wrote what
would become a famous letter to the club: "As the majority of hob

byists must be aware, most ofyou steal your software. Is this fair? ...
One thing you do is prevent good software from being written. Who
can afford to do professional work for nothing? ... I would appreciate
letters from anyone who wants to pay up."
Steve Jobs, simUarly, did not embrace the notion that Wozniak's
creations, be it a Blue Box or a computer, wanted to be free. So he
convinced Wozniak to stop giving away copies of his schematics. Most
people didn't have time to buUd it themselves anyway, Jobs argued.
"Why don't we buUd and seU printed circuit boards to them?" It was
an example oftheirsymbiosis. "Every time I'd design something great,
Steve would find away to make money forus," said Wozniak. Wozniak
admitted that he would have never thought of doing that on his own.
"It never crossed my mind to seU computers. It was Steve who said,
'Let's hold them in the air and seU a few.'"

Jobsworked out a planto payaguyhe knew at Atarito drawthe cir
cuitboards and then print up fifty or so. That wouldcostabout $1,000,
plus the fee to the designer. They could seU them for $40 apiece and
perhaps clear a profit of $700. Wozniak was dubious that they could
seU them aU. "I didn't seehow we would make our money back,"he recaUed. He was already in trouble with hislandlordfor bouncing checks
and now had to pay each month in cash.
Jobs knew^how to appeal to Wozniak. He didn't argue that they
were sure to make money, but instead that they would have a fun ad
venture. "Even if we lose our money, we'U have a company," saidJobs
as they were driving in his Volkswagen bus. "For once in ourUves, we'U
have a company." This was enticing to Wozniak, even more than any
prospect of getting rich. He recaUed, "I was excited to think about us
Uke that.To be two best friends startinga company. Wow. I knewright
then that I'd do it. How could I not?"

In orderto raise the money they needed, Wozniak sold his HP 65
calculator for $500, though the buyer ended up stiffing him for half
of that. For his part, Jobs sold his Volkswagen bus for $1,500. But
the person who bought it came to find him two weeks later and said
the engine hadbroken down, andJobs agreed to payfor halfof the re-

TheApple I

63

pairs. Despite these littlesetbacks, theynow had, with their own smaU

savings thrown in, about $1,300 in working capital, the design for a
product, and a plan. They would start their own computer company.
Apple Is Born
Now that they had decided to start a business, they needed a name.
Jobs had gone for another visit to the AU One Farm, where he had

been pruning the Gravenstein apple trees, and Wozniak picked him
up at the airport. On the ride down to Los Altos, theybandied around
options. They considered some typical techwords, such asMatrix, and
some neologisms, such as Executek, and some straightforward boring

names, Uke Personal Computers Inc. The deadUne for deciding was
the next day, when Jobs wanted to start fiUng the papers. FinaUy Jobs
proposed Apple Computer. "I was on one of my fruitarian diets," he
explained. "I hadjust come back from the apple farm. It sounded fun,
spirited, and not intimidating. Apple tookthe edge offthe word 'com
puter.' Plus, it would getus ahead ofAtari in the phone book." He told
Wozniak that if a better name did not hit them by the nextafternoon,
theywould just stickwith Apple. And theydid.
Apple. It was a smart choice. The word instantly signaled friendUness and simpUcity. It managed to be both sUghtly off-beat and
as normal as a sUce of pie. There was a whiff of counterculture,
back-to-nature earthiness to it, yet nothing could be more American.
And the two words together—Apple Computer—provided an amus
ingdisjuncture. "It doesn't quite make sense," said MikeMarkkula, who
soon thereafter became the first chairman of the new company. "So it

forces your brain to dweU on it.Apple and computers, that doesn't go
together! So it helped us grow brand awareness."
Wozniak was not yet ready to commit fiiU-time. He was an HP

company manat heart, or sohe thought, andhewanted to keep hisday
job there. Jobs reaUzed he needed an aUy to help corral Wozniak and
adjudicate if there was a disagreement. So he enUsted his friend Ron
Wayne, the middle-aged engineer at Atariwho had once started a slot
machine company.

64

Walter Isaacson

Wayne knew thatit would notbe easy to make Wozniak quit HP,
nor was it necessary right away. Instead the key was to convince him
that his computer designs would be owned by the Apple partner

ship. "Woz had a parental attitude toward the circuits he developed,
and he wanted to be able to use them in other appUcations or let HP

use them," Wayne said. "Jobs and I reaUzed that these circuits would
be the core ofApple. We spent two hours in a roundtable discussion at
my apartment, andI was able to getWoz to accept this." His argument
was that a great engineer would beremembered only ifhe teamed with
a great marketer, and this required him to commit his designs to the
partnership. Jobs was so impressed and grateful that he offered Wayne
a 10% stake in the new partnership, turning him into a tie-breaker if
Jobs and Wozniak disagreed over an issue.

"They were very different, but they made a powerful team," said
Wayne. Jobs at times seemed to be driven by demons, whUe Woz
seemed a naifwho was toyed with by angels. Jobs had a bravado that
helped him get things done, occasionaUy by manipulating people. He
couldbe charismatic, even mesmerizing, but also coldand brutal.Woz
niak,in contrast, wasshyand sociaUy awkward, which made him seem

childishly sweet. "Woz isvery bright in some areas, but he's almost Uke
a savant, since he was so stunted when it came to deaUng with people
he didn't know," saidJobs. "We were a good pair." It helped that Jobs

was awed byWozniak's engineering wizardry, andWozniak was awed
byJobs's business drive. "I never wanted to deal with people and step
on toes, but Steve could caU up people he didn't know and make them
do things," Wozniak recaUed. "He could be rough on people he didn't
think were smart, but he never treated me rudely, even in later years
when maybe I couldn't answer a question as weU as he wanted."
Even after Wozniak became convinced that his new computer de

sign should become the property of the Apple partnership, he feltthat
he had to offerit first to HP, since he wasworkingthere."I beUeved it

was my duty to teU HP about what I had designed whUe working for
them. That was the right thing and the ethical thing." So he demon
strated it to his managers in the spring of 1976. The senior executive
at the meeting was impressed, and seemed torn, but he finaUy said it
was not something that HP could develop. It was a hobbyist product,

TheApple I

65

atleast for now, and didn't fit into the company's high-quaUty market
segments. "I was disappointed," Wozniak recaUed, "but now I was free
to enterinto the Apple partnership."

OnAprU 1,1976,Jobs and Wozniak went toWayne's apartment in
Mountain View to draw up the partnership agreement. Wayne said he
had some experience "writing in legalese," so he composed the threepage document himself. His "legalese" got the better of him. Para
graphs began with various flourishes: "Be it noted herewith ... Be it
further noted herewith ... Now the refore [sic], in consideration of
the respective assignments of interests ..." But the division of shares

and profits was clear—45%-45%-10%—and it was stipulated that any
expenditures of more than $100 would require agreement of at least
two of the partners. Also, the responsibiUties were speUed out. "Woz
niak shaU assume both general and major responsibility for the con
duct ofElectrical Engineering;Jobs shaU assume general responsibUity
for Electrical Engineering and Marketing, and Wayne shaU assume
major responsibUity for Mechanical Engineering and Documenta
tion." Jobs signed in lowercase script, Wozniak in careful cursive, and
Wayne in an Ulegible squiggle.

Wayne then got cold feet. As Jobs started planning to borrow
and spend more money, he recaUed the faUure of his own company.
He didn't want to go through that again. Jobs and Wozniak had no
personal assets, but Wayne (who worried about a global financial
Armageddon) kept gold coins hidden in his mattress. Because they
had structured Apple as a simple partnership rather than a corpora
tion, the partners would be personaUy Uable for the debts, and Wayne
was afraid potential creditors would go after him. So he returned to
the Santa Clara County office just eleven days later with a "statement
ofwithdrawal" and an amendment to the partnership agreement. "By
virtue of a re-assessment of understandings by and between aU par
ties," it began,"Wayne shaU hereinafter cease to function in the status

of'Partner.'" It noted thatin payment for his 10% ofthe company, he
received $800, and shortly afterward $1,500 more.
Had he stayed on and kept his 10% stake, at the end of 2010 it
would have beenworth approximately $2.6 biUion. Insteadhe was then

Uving alone in a smaU home in Pahrump, Nevada, where heplayed the

66

Walter Isaacson

penny slot machines and Uved off his social security check. He later
claimed he had no regrets. "I made the best decision for me at the
time. Both of them were real whirlwinds, and I knewmy stomach and
it wasn't ready for such a ride."

Jobs and Wozniak took the stage together for a presentation to the
Homebrew Computer Club shortly after they signed Apple into ex
istence. Wozniak held up one of their newly produced circuit boards
and described the microprocessor, the eight ldlobytes of memory, and
the version of BASIC he had written. He also emphasized what he

caUed the main thing: "a human-typable keyboard instead of a stupid,
cryptic front panel with a bunch ofUghts and switches." Then it was
Jobs's turn. He pointed outthattheApple, unUke theAltair, hadaU the
essential components buUt in. Then he chaUenged them with a ques
tion: Howmuch would people bewiUing to pay for such a wonderful
machine? He was trying to get them to see the amazing value of the
Apple. It was a rhetorical flourish he would use at product presenta
tions overthe ensuing decades.
The audience was not very impressed. The Apple had a cut-rate

microprocessor, not the Intel 8080. But one important person stayed
behind to hear more. His name was Paul TerreU, and in 1975 he had

opened a computer store, which hedubbed theByte Shop, onCamino
Real in Menlo Park. Now, a year later, he had three stores and visions
of buUding a national chain. Jobs was thriUed to give him a private
demo. "Take a lookat this," he said. "You're goingto Uke what yousee."
TerreU was impressed enough to handJobs and Woz his card. "Keep
in touch," he said.

"I'm keeping in touch," Jobs announced the next day when he
walked barefoot into the Byte Shop. He made the sale. TerreU agreed
to order fifty computers. But there was a condition: He didn't want
just $50 printed circuit boards, for which customers would then have
to buy aU the chips and do the assembly. That might appeal to a few
hard-core hobbyists, but not to most customers. Instead hewanted the
boards to befully assembled. Forthat hewas wiUing to payabout $500
apiece, cash on delivery.

Jobs immediately caUed Wozniak at HP. "Are you sitting down?" he

TheApple I

67

asked. Wozniak said he wasn't. Jobs nevertheless proceeded togive him
the news. "I was shocked, justcompletely shocked," Wozniak recaUed.
"I wiU never forget that moment."

To fiU the order, they needed about $15,000 worth ofparts. AUen
Baum, the third prankster from Homestead High, and his father agreed
to loan them $5,000.Jobs tried to borrow more from a bank in Los

Altos, but the manager looked at him and, not surprisingly, decUned.
Hewent to Haltek Supply and offered an equity stake in Apple in re
turn for the parts, but the owner decided they were "a couple ofyoung,
scruffy-looking guys," and decUned. Alcorn at Atari would seU them
chips only if they paid cash upfront. FinaUy, Jobs was able to convince
the manager of Cramer Electronics to caU PaulTerreU to confirm that
he had reaUy committed to a $25,000 order. TerreU was at a conference

when heheard over aloudspeaker that he had an emergency caU (Jobs
had been persistent). The Cramer manager told him that two scruffy
kids had just walked in waving an order from the Byte Shop. Was it
real? TerreU confirmed that it was, and the store agreed to front Jobs
the parts on thirty-day credit.

Garage Band

TheJobs house in Los Altos became the assembly point for the fifty
Apple I boards thathad tobe deUvered to the Byte Shop within thirty
days, when the payment for the parts would come due. AU avaUable hands were enlisted: Jobs and Wozniak, plus Daniel Kottke, his
ex-girlfriend Elizabeth Holmes (who had broken away from the cult
she'd joined), andJobs's pregnant sister, Patty. Her vacated bedroom as

weU as the kitchen table and garage were commandeered as work space.
Holmes, who had taken jewelry classes, was given thetask ofsoldering
chips. "Most I did weU, but I got flux on a few of them," she recaUed.

This didn't please Jobs. "We don't have a chip to spare," he railed, cor
rectly. He shifted her to bookkeeping and paperwork at the kitchen
table, and he didthe soldering himself. Whenthey completed a board,
they would hand it off to Wozniak. "I would plug each assembled
board into the TV and keyboard to test it to see if it worked," he said.

68

Walter Isaacson

"Ifit did, I putit in a box. If it didn't, I'd figure what pin hadn't gotten
into the socketright."

Paul Jobs suspended his sideUne of repairing old cars so that the
Apple team could have the whole garage. He put in a long old work
bench, hung a schematic ofthe computer onthe new plasterboard waU
he buUt, and set up rows of labeled drawers for the components. He
also buUt a burn box bathed in heat lamps so the computer boards

could be tested by running overnight at high temperatures. When
therewasthe occasional eruptionof temper, an occurrence not uncom

mon around his son, Paul would impart some of his calm. "What's
the matter?" he would say. "You got a feather up your ass?" In return
heoccasionaUy asked toborrow back theTV setso he could watch the
end of a footbaU game. During some ofthese breaks, Jobs and Kottke
would go outside and play guitar on the lawn.
Clara Jobs didn't mind losing most of her house to pUes of parts
and houseguests, butshe was frustrated byherson's increasingly quirky
diets. "She would roU her eyes at his latest eating obsessions," recaUed
Holmes. "She justwanted him to be healthy, and he would be making
weird pronouncements Uke, Tm a fruitarian and I wiU only eat leaves
picked byvirgins in the moonUght.'"
After a dozen assembled boards had been approved by Wozniak,
Jobs drove them over to the Byte Shop. TerreU was a bit taken aback.
There was no power supply, case, monitor, or keyboard. He had ex
pected something more finished. But Jobs stared him down, and he
agreed to take deUvery and pay.
After thirtydays Apple was on the verge of being profitable, "We
were able to buUd the boards more cheaply than wethought, because I
gotagood deal onparts,"Jobs recaUed. "So thefifty we sold to theByte
Shop almost paid for aU the material we needed to make a hundred
boards." Now they could make a real profit by selUng the remaining
fifty to their friends and Homebrew compatriots.
EUzabeth Holmes officiaUy became the part-time bookkeeper at
$4 an hour, driving down from San Francisco once a week and figur
ing out how to portJobs's checkbook into a ledger. In order to make

Apple seem Uke areal company,Jobs hired ananswering service, which
would relay messages to his mother. Ron Wayne drew a logo, using the

TheApple I

69

ornate Une-drawing style of Victorian iUustrated fiction, that featured

Newton sitting under a tree framed by a quote from Wordsworth: "A
mind forever voyaging through strange seas ofthought, alone." It was

a rather odd motto, one that fit Wayne's self-image more than Apple
Computer. Perhaps a better Wordsworth line would have been the
poet's description of those involved in the start of the French Revolu

tion: "BUss was it in that dawn to be alive / But to be young was very
heaven!" As Wozniak later exulted, "We were participating inthe big
gest revolution that had ever happened, I thought. I was so happy to
be a part of it."

Woz had already begun thinking about the next version of the

machine, so they started caUing their current model the Apple I.Jobs
and Woz would drive up and down Camino Real trying to get the elec
tronics stores to seU it. In addition to the fifty sold by the Byte Shop
and almost fifty sold to friends, they were buUding another hundred
for retaU outlets. Not surprisingly, they had contradictory impulses:
Wozniak wanted to seU them for about what it cost to buUd them, but
Jobs wanted to make a serious profit. Jobs prevaUed. Hepicked aretail
price that was about three times what it cost to buUd the boards and

a 33% markup over the $500 wholesale price that TerreU and other

stores paid. The result was $666.66. "I was always into repeating dig
its," Wozniak said. "The phone number for my dial-a-joke service
was 255-6666." Neither of them knew that in the Book of Revelation

666 symboUzed the "number of the beast," but they soon were faced

with complaints, especiaUy after 666 was featured in that year's hit
movie, The Omen. (In 2010 one ofthe original Apple I computers was
sold at auction by Christie's for $213,000.)

The first feature story on the new machine appeared in theJuly 1976
issue ofInterface, a now-defunct hobbyist magazine. Jobs and friends
were stiU making them by hand in his house, but the article referred

tohim as the director ofmarketing and "a former private consultant to
Atari." It made Apple sound Uke areal company. "Steve communicates
with many ofthe computer clubs tokeep his finger on the heartbeat of
this young industry," the article reported, and it quoted him explain
ing, "Ifwe can rap about their needs, feeUngs and motivations, we can
respond appropriately bygiving them what they want."

70

Walter Isaacson

By this time they had other competitors, in addition to the Altair,
most notably theIMSAI8080 and ProcessorTechnology Corporation's
SOL-20. The latter was designed by Lee Felsenstein and Gordon
French of the Homebrew Computer Club. They aU had the chance
to go on display during Labor Day weekend of 1976, at the first an
nual Personal Computer Festival, held in a tired hotel on the decay
ing boardwalk ofAtlantic City, New Jersey. Jobs and Wozniak took a
TWA flight to PhUadelphia, cradling one cigar box with the Apple I
andanother with the prototype for the successor thatWozwas work
ing on. Sitting in the row behind them was Felsenstein, who looked
at the Apple I and pronounced it "thoroughly unimpressive." Woz
niak was unnerved by the conversation in the row behind him. "We
could hear them talking in advanced business talk," he recaUed, "using
businessUke acronyms we'd never heard before."
Wozniak spent most of his time in their hotel room, tweaking his

new prototype. He was too shy to stand at the card table that Apple
had been assigned near the back ofthe exhibition haU. Daniel Kottke
had taken the train down from Manhattan, where he was now attend

ing Columbia, and he manned the table while Jobs walked thefloor to
inspect the competition. What he saw did not impress him. Wozniak,
he felt reassured, was the best circuit engineer, and the Apple I (and
surely its successor) could beat the competition in terms of fiinction-

aUty. However, the SOL-20 was better looking. It had a sleek metal
case, a keyboard, a power supply, and cables. It looked as if it had been
produced by grown-ups. The Apple I, on the other hand, appeared as
scruffy as its creators.

CHAPTER

SIX

THE APPLE II
Dawn of a New Age

AnIntegrated Package
As Jobs walked the floor ofthe Personal Computer Festival, he came to
the reaUzation that Paul TerreU ofthe Byte Shop had been right: Per
sonal computers should come in a complete package. The next Apple,
he decided, needed to have a great case and a buUt-in keyboard, and
be integrated end to end, from the power supply to the software. "My
vision was to create thefirst fuUy packaged computer," herecaUed. "We
were no longer aiming for the handful of hobbyists who Uked to as
semble their own computers, who knew how to buy transformers and
keyboards. For every one ofthem there were a thousand people who
would want the machine to be ready to run."
71

72

Walter Isaacson

In their hotel room on that Labor Day weekend of 1976, Woz

niak tinkered with the prototype of the new machine, to be named

the Apple II,that Jobs hoped would take them to this next level. They
brought the prototype out only once, late at night, to test it on the
color projection television in one of the conference rooms. Wozniak
had come upwith aningenious way to goose the machine's chips into
creating color, and he wanted to see if it would work on the type of
television that uses a projector to display on a movie-like screen. "I
figured a projector might have a different color circuitry that would
choke onmy color method," he recaUed. "So I hooked up theApple II
tothis projector and itworked perfectly." As he typed onhis keyboard,
colorfulUnes and swirls burst on the screen across the room. The only

outsider who saw this first Apple II was thehotel's technician. He said
he had looked at aU the machines, and this was the one he would be
buying.

To produce the fuUy packaged Apple II would require signifi
cant capital, so they considered seUing the rights to a larger company.
Jobs went to AlAlcorn and asked for the chance to pitch it to Atari's
management. He set up a meeting with the company's president, Joe
Keenan, who was a lot more conservative than Alcorn and BushneU.

"Steve goes in to pitch him, but Joe couldn't stand him," Alcorn re
caUed. "He didn't appreciate Steve's hygiene."Jobs was barefoot, and at
one point put his feet up on a desk. "Not only are we not going tobuy
this thing," Keenan shouted, "but get your feet off my desk!" Alcorn
recaUed thinking, "Oh, weU. There goes thatpossibility."
In September Chuck Peddle of the Commodore computer com

pany came by the Jobs house to get a demo. "We'd opened Steve's
garage to the sunUght, and he came in wearing a suit and a cowboy
hat," Wozniak recaUed. Peddle loved the Apple II, and he arranged a

presentation for his top brass afew weeks later at Commodore head
quarters. "You might want to buy us for a few hundred thousand
doUars," Jobs said when they got there. Wozniak was stunned bythis
"ridiculous" suggestion, but Jobs persisted. The Commodore honchos
caUed a few days later to say they had decided it would be cheaper to
buUd their own machine. Jobs was not upset. He had checked out
Commodore anddecided that itsleadership was "sleazy." Wozniak did

TheApple II

73

not rue the lost money, but his engineering sensibiUties were offended
when the company cameout with the Commodore PET nine months

later. "It kind of sickened me. They made a real crappy product by
doing it so quick. Theycould have had Apple."
The Commodore flirtation brought to the surface a potential con

flict between Jobs and Wozniak: Were they truly equal in what they
contributed to Apple and what they should get out ofit? Jerry Woz
niak, who exalted the value of engineers over mere entrepreneurs and
marketers, thought most ofthe money should be going to his son. He
confronted Jobs personaUy when hecame bytheWozniak house. "You

don't deserve shit," he told Jobs. "You haven't produced anything."Jobs
began to cry, which was not unusual. He had never been, and would
never be, adept at containing his emotions. He told Steve Wozniak

that he was wiUing to caU off the partnership. "Ifwe're not fifty-fifty,"
he said to his friend, "you can have the whole thing." Wozniak, how
ever, understood better than his father the symbiosis they had. If it
had not been for Jobs, he might stiU be handing out schematics of
his boards for free at the back of Homebrew meetings. It was Jobs
who had turned his ingenious designs into a budding business, just as
he had with the Blue Box. He agreed they should remain partners.
It was a smart caU. To make the Apple II successful required more
than just Wozniak's awesome circuit design. It would need to be pack
aged into a fully integrated consumer product, and thatwas Jobs's role.

He began by asking their erstwhile partner Ron Wayne to design
a case. "I assumed they had no money, so I did one that didn't require
any tooUng and could be fabricated in astandard metal shop," he said.
His design caUed for a Plexiglas cover attached by metal straps and a
roUtop door that slid down over the keyboard.
Jobs didn't Uke it. He wanted a simple and elegant design, which
he hoped would set Apple apart from the other machines, with their

clunky gray metal cases. WhUe haunting the appUance aisles atMacy's,
he was struck by the Cuisinart food processors and decided that he
wanted a sleek case made of light molded plastic. At a Homebrew
meeting, he offered a local consultant, Jerry Manock, $1,500 to pro
duce such a design. Manock, dubious about Jobs's appearance, asked

for the money up front. Jobs refused, but Manock took the job anyway.

74

Walter Isaacson

Withinweeks hehadproduced a simple foam-molded plastic case that
was uncluttered and exuded friendUness. Jobs was thriUed.

Next came the power supply. Digital geeks like Wozniak paid Uttle
attention to something so analog and mundane, but Jobs decided it
was a key component. In particular hewanted—as hewould his entire
career—to provide power in a way that avoided the need for a fan.
Fans inside computers were notZen-Uke; they distracted. He dropped

by Atari to consult with Alcorn, who knew old-fashioned electrical
engineering. "Al turned me on to this briUiant guy named Rod Holt,
whowas a chain-smoking Marxist who had beenthrough many mar

riages and was an expert on everything," Jobs recaUed. Like Manock
and others meeting Jobs for the first time, Holttook a look at him and
was skeptical. "I'm expensive," Holt said. Jobs sensed hewas worth it
andsaid that cost was noproblem. "Hejustconned me into working,"
said Holt, who endedup joining Apple fuU-time.
Instead of a conventional Unear power supply, Holt buUt one Uke
those used in osciUoscopes. It switched the power on and offnot sixty

times per second, but thousands oftimes; this aUowed it to store the
power for far less time, and thus throw offless heat. "That switching
power supply was as revolutionary as the Apple II logic board was,"
Jobs later said. "Rod doesn't get a lot of credit for this in the history
books, but he should. Every computer now uses switching power sup-

pUes, and they aU rip off Rod's design." For aU ofWozniak's brilliance,
this was notsomething hecould have done. "I only knew vaguely what
a switching power supply was," Woz admitted.
Jobs's father hadonce taught him that a drive for perfection meant
caring about the craftsmanship even ofthe parts unseen. Jobs appUed
that to the layout ofthe circuit board inside the Apple II. He rejected
the initial design because the Unes were notstraight enough.
This passion for perfection led him to indulge his instinct to con
trol. Most hackers and hobbyists Uked to customize, modify, and jack
various things into their computers. To Jobs, this was a threat to a
seamless end-to-end user experience. Wozniak, a hacker at heart, dis
agreed. He wanted to include eight slots on the Apple II for users to
insert whatever smaUer circuit boards andperipherals theymightwant.
Jobs insisted there be only two, for a printer and a modem. "UsuaUy

TheAppleII

75

I'm reaUy easy to get along with, but this time I told him, If that's

what you want, gogetyourself another computer,'" Wozniak recaUed.
"I knew thatpeople Uke me would eventuaUy come up with things to
add to any computer." Wozniak won the argument that time, but he
could sense his power waning. "I was in a position to do that then. I
wouldn't always be."

Mike Markkula

All ofthis required money. "The tooUng ofthis plastic case was going
to cost, Uke, $100,000," Jobs said. "Just to get this whole thing into
production was going to be, Uke, $200,000." He went back to Nolan

BushneU, this time toget him toputinsome money and take a minor
ity equity stake. "He asked me if I would put $50,000 in andhe would
give me a third of the company," said BushneU. "I was so smart, I said

no. It's kind offun to think about that, when I'm not crying."
BushneU suggested thatJobs try Don Valentine, astraight-shooting
former marketing manager at National Semiconductor who had

founded Sequoia Capital, a pioneering venture capital firm. Valentine
arrived at theJobses' garage in aMercedes wearing a blue suit, buttondown shirt, and rep tie. His first impression was thatJobs looked and
smeUed odd. "Steve was trying to be the embodiment of the counter
culture. He had a wispy beard, was very thin, and looked Uke Ho Chi
Minh."

Valentine, however, did not become a preeminent SUicon VaUey
investor by relying on surface appearances. What bothered him more

was thatJobs knew nothing about marketing and seemed content to
peddle his product to individual stores one by one. "Ifyou want me
to finance you," Valentine told him, "you need to have one person as a
partner who understands marketing and distribution and can write a

business plan."Jobs tended tobe either bristly orsoUcitous when older
people offered him advice. With Valentine he was the latter. "Send me

three suggestions," he repUed. Valentine did, Jobs met them, and he
cUcked with one of them, a man named Mike Markkula, who would
endup playing a critical role at Apple for the next two decades.

76

Walter Isaacson

Markkula was only thirty-three, but he had already retired after
working at FairchUd and then Intel, where he made miUions on his
stock options when the chip maker went pubUc. He was a cautious
and shrewd man, with the precise moves of someone who had been a
gymnast in high school, and he exceUed at figuring out pricing strat
egies, distribution networks, marketing, and finance. Despite being
sUghtly reserved, he had a flashy side when it came to enjoying his
newly minted wealth. HebuUt himselfahouse in Lake Tahoe and later
an outsize mansion in the hiUs of Woodside.When he showed up for

his first meeting atJobs's garage, he was driving not a dark Mercedes
Uke Valentine, but a highly poUshed gold Corvette convertible. "When
I arrived at the garage, Woz was at the workbench and immediately
began showing offtheApple II," Markkula recaUed. "I looked past the
fact that both guys needed a haircut andwas amazed bywhatI saw on
that workbench. You can always get a haircut."
Jobs immediately Uked Markkula. "He was short and he had been

passed over for the top marketing job at Intel, which I suspect made
him want to prove himself* He also struck Jobs as decent and fair.
"You could teU that if he could screw you, he wouldn't. He had a real
moral sense to him." Wozniak was equaUy impressed. "I thought he

was the nicest person ever," he recaUed. "Better stiU, he actuaUy Uked
what we had!"

Markkula proposed toJobs thatthey write abusiness plan together.
"If it comes out weU, I'll invest," Markkula said,"and if not, you've got

afew weeks ofmy time for free." Jobs began going toMarkkula's house
in the evenings, kicking around projections and talking through the
night. "We made alotofassumptions, such as about how many houses
would have a personal computer, and there were nights we were up
untU 4 a.m.," Jobs recaUed. Markkula ended up writing most of the
plan. "Steve would say, 'I wiU bring you this section next time,' but he
usuaUy didn't deUver ontime, so I ended up doing it."
Markkula's plan envisioned ways of getting beyond the hobbyist
market. "He talked about introducing the computer to regular people
in regular homes, doing things Uke keeping track ofyour favorite reci
pes or balancing your checkbook," Wozniak recaUed. Markkula made
a wUd prediction: "We're going to be a Fortune 500 company in two

TheAppleII

77

years," he said. "This isthestartofanindustry. It happens once in a de
cade." It would take Apple seven years to break into the Fortune 500,
but the spiritof Markkula's prediction turned out to be true.
Markkula offered to guarantee a Une of credit of up to $250,000
in return for being made a one-third equity participant. Apple would
incorporate, and he along with Jobs and Wozniak would each own
26% of the stock. The rest would be reserved to attract future inves

tors. The three met in the cabana by Markkula's swimming pool and
sealed the deal. "I thought it was unUkely that Mike would ever see

that $250,000 again, and I was impressed that he was willing to risk
it," Jobs recaUed.

Nowit was necessary to convince Wozniak to come on board full-

time. "Why can't I keep doing this on the side and just have HP as my
secure job for life?" he asked. Markkula said that wouldn't work, and

he gave Wozniak a deadUne ofa few days to decide. "I felt very inse
cure in starting a company where I would be expected to push people
around and control what they did," Wozniak recaUed. "I'd decided long
ago that I would never become someone authoritative." So he went to

Markkula's cabana and announced that he was not leaving HP.
Markkula shrugged and said okay. But Jobs got very upset. He ca
joled Wozniak; he got friends to try to convince him; he cried, yeUed,
and threw a couple offits. He even went toWozniak's parents' house,
burst into tears, and askedJerry for help. By this point Wozniak's father
had reaUzed there was real money to be made by capitaUzing on the
Apple II, and he joined forces on Jobs's behalf. "I started getting phone
caUs at work and home from my dad, my mom, my brother, and vari
ous friends," Wozniak recaUed. "Every one of them told me I'd made
the wrong decision." None of that worked. Then Alien Baum, their

Buck Fry Club mate atHomestead High, caUed. "You reaUy ought to
go ahead and do it," he said. He argued that if he joined Apple fuUtime, he would not have to go into management or give up being an
engineer. "That was exactly whatI needed to hear," Wozniak latersaid.

"I could stay at the bottom ofthe organization chart, as an engineer."
He caUed Jobs and declared that he was now ready to come onboard.
On January 3, 1977, the new corporation, the Apple Computer
Co., was officiaUy created, and it bought out the old partnership that

78

Walter Isaacson

hadbeen formed byJobs and Wozniak nine months earlier. Few people
noticed. That month the Homebrew surveyed its members and found
that, of the 181 who owned personal computers, only six owned an
Apple. Jobs was convinced, however, that the Apple II would change
that.

Markkula would become a father figure to Jobs. Like Jobs's adop
tive father, he would indulge Jobs's strong wiU, and like his biological
father, he would end up abandoning him. "Markkula was as much a
father-son relationship as Steve ever had," said the venture capital
ist Arthur Rock. He began to teach Jobs about marketing and sales.
"Mike reaUy took me under his wing," Jobs recaUed. "His values were

much aUgned with mine. He emphasized that you should never start
a company with the goal ofgetting rich. Your goal should be making
something you beUeve in and making a company thatwiU last."
Markkula wrote his principles in a one-page paper tided "The
Apple Marketing PhUosophy" that stressed three points. The first was

empathy, an intimate connection with the feehngs of the customer:
"We wiU truly understand their needs better than any other company."
The second wasfocus: "In order to do a good job ofthose things that
we decide to do, we must eUminate aU of the unimportant opportuni

ties." The third and equaUy important principle, awkwardly named,
was impute. It emphasized that people form an opinion about a com

pany or product based on the signals that it conveys. "People DO judge
a book by its cover," he wrote. "We may have the best product, the
highest quaUty, the most useful software etc.; ifwe present them in a
sUpshod manner, they wiU be perceived as sUpshod; ifwe present them
ina creative, professional manner, we wiU impute the desired quaUties."
For the rest of his career, Jobswould understand the needs and de

sires ofcustomers better than any other business leader, hewould focus
on a handful of core products, and he would care, sometimes obses

sively, about marketing and image and even the detaUs ofpackaging.
"When you open the box ofan iPhone or iPad, we want that tactUe
experience to set the tone for how you perceive the product," he said.
"Mike taught me that."

TheApple II

79

Regis McKenna

The first step in this process was convincing the VaUey's premier
pubUcist, Regis McKenna, to take on Apple as a cUent. McKenna was
from a large working-class Pittsburgh famUy, and bred into his bones
was a steeUness thathecloaked with charm. A coUege dropout, hehad

worked for FairchUd and National Semiconductor before starting his
own PR and advertising firm. His two specialties were doUng out ex
clusive interviews with his cUents to journaUsts he had cultivated and
coming up with memorable ad campaigns that created brand aware
ness for products such as microchips. Oneof these was a series of col

orful magazine ads for Intel that featured racing cars and poker chips
rather than the usual duU performance charts. These caughtJobs's eye.
HecaUed Intel and asked who created them. "Regis McKenna," hewas
told. "I asked them what Regis McKenna was,"Jobs recaUed, "and they
told me he was aperson." When Jobs phoned, he couldn't get through
to McKenna. Instead he was transferred to Frank Burge, an account
executive, who tried to put him off. Jobs caUed back almost every day.
Burge finaUy agreed to drive out to the Jobs garage. "Holy Christ,
this guy is going to be something else," he recaUed thinking. "What's
the least amount oftime I can spend with this clown without being
rude." Then, when he was confronted with the unwashed and shaggy
Jobs, two things hit him: "First, he was an incredibly smart young man.
Second, I didn't understand afiftieth ofwhat he was talking about."
So Jobs and Wozniak were invited to have a meeting with, as his
impish business cards read, "Regis McKenna, himself." This time it

was the normaUy shy Wozniak who became prickly. McKenna glanced
at an article Wozniak was writing about Apple and suggested that it
was too technical and needed to be Uvened up. "I don't want any PR
man touching my copy," Wozniak snapped. McKenna suggested itwas

time for them to leave his office. "But Steve caUed me back right away
and said he wanted to meet again," McKenna recaUed. "This time he
came without Woz, and we hit it off."

McKenna had his team get to work on brochures for the Apple II.
The first thing they did was to replace Ron Wayne's ornate Victo-

80

Walter Isaacson

rian woodcut-style logo, which ran counter to McKenna's colorful
and playful advertising style. So an art director, Rob Janoff, was as
signed to create a new one. "Don't make it cute," Jobs ordered. Janoff
came up with a simple apple shape in two versions, one whole and
the other with a bite taken out of it. The first looked too much Uke a

cherry, so Jobs chose the one with a bite. He also picked a version that
was striped in six colors, with psychedeUc hues sandwiched between
whole-earth green and sky blue, even though that made printing the
logo significantly more expensive. Atop the brochure McKenna put a
maxim, often attributed to Leonardo da Vinci, that wouldbecome the

defining precept ofJobs's design phUosophy: "Simplicity istheultimate
sophistication."

The First Launch Event

The introduction of the Apple II was scheduled to coincide with the
first West Coast Computer Faire, tobeheld inApril 1977 in San Fran

cisco, organized by a Homebrew stalwart, Jim Warren. Jobs signed
Apple up for a booth as soon as he got the information packet. He
wanted to secure a location right at the front of the haU as a dramatic

way to launch the Apple II, and so he shocked Wozniak by paying
$5,000 in advance. "Steve decided that this was our big launch," said
Wozniak. "We would show the world we had a great machine and a
great company."
It was an appUcation ofMarkkula's admonition that it was impor
tantto"impute" your greatness by making a memorable impression on

people, especiaUy when launching a new product. That was reflected
in the care that Jobs took with Apple's display area. Other exhibitors

had card tables and poster board signs. Apple had a counter draped
in black velvet and a large pane ofbackUt Plexiglas with Janoff's new
logo. They put on display the only three Apple lis that had been fin
ished, but empty boxes were piled up togive the impression that there
were manymore on hand.

Jobs was furious that the computer cases had arrived with tiny
blemishes on them, so he had his handful of employees sand and

TheApple II

81

poUsh them. The imputing even extended to gussying up Jobs and
Wozniak. Markkula sentthem to a SanFrancisco taUor for three-piece
suits, whichlooked faintly ridiculous on them,Uke tuxes on teenagers.
"Markkula explained howwewould aU have to dress up nicely, howwe
should appear and look, how we should act,"Wozniak recaUed.
It was worth the effort. The Apple II looked soUd yet friendly in
its sleek beige case, unUke the intimidating metal-clad machines and
naked boards on the other tables. Apple got three hundred orders at
the show, and Jobs met a Japanese textUe maker, Mizushima Satoshi,
who became Apple's first dealer in Japan.
The fancy clothes and Markkula's injunctions could not, however,
stop the irrepressible Wozniak from playing some practical jokes. One
program that he displayed tried to guess people's nationaUty from their
last name and then produced the relevant ethnic jokes. He also created
and distributed a hoax brochure for a new computer caUed the "Zaltair," withaU sorts offake ad-copy superlatives Uke "Imagine a carwith
five wheels." Jobs briefly feU for the joke and even took pride that the
Apple II stacked up weU against the Zaltair in the comparison chart.
He didn't reaUze whohadpuUed the prank untU eightyears later, when
Wozgave him a framed copy of the brochure as a birthday gift.

Mike Scott

Apple was now areal company, with adozen employees, aUne ofcredit,
andthe daUy pressures that can come from customers and suppUers. It
had even moved out oftheJobses' garage, finaUy, into a rented office on
Stevens CreekBoulevard in Cupertino, about a mUe from where Jobs
and Wozniakwent to high school.
Jobsdid not wear hisgrowing responsibUities gracefuUy. He had al
ways been temperamental and bratty. At Atari his behavior had caused

him to be banished to the night shift, but at Apple thatwas not pos
sible. "He became increasingly tyrannical and sharp in his criticism,"
according to Markkula. "He would teU people, That design looks Uke
shit.'" He was particularly rough on Wozniak's young programmers,
RandyWigginton and Chris Espinosa. "Steve would come in, take a

82

Walter Isaacson

quick look at what I had done, and teU me it was shit without having
anyideawhat it was or why I had done it," said Wigginton, who was
just out of high school.
There was also the issue of his hygiene. He was stiU convinced,
against aU evidence, that hisvegan diets meant that he didn't need to
use a deodorant or take regular showers. "We would have to UteraUy
put himoutthe door and teU him to gotake a shower," said Markkula.
"At meetings we had to look at his dirty feet." Sometimes, to reUeve
stress, he would soak his feet in the toUet, a practice that was not as
soothingfor his coUeagues.
Markkula was averse to confrontation, so he decided to bring in a

president, Mike Scott, to keep a tighter rein on Jobs. Markkula and
Scott had joined FairchUd on the same day in 1967, had adjoining
offices, and shared the same birthday, which they celebrated together
each year. At their birthday lunch in February 1977, when Scott was
turning thirty-two, Markkula invited him to become Apple's new
president.
On paper he looked like a great choice. He was running a manu

facturing Une for National Semiconductor, and he had the advantage
of being a manager whofully understood engineering. In person, how
ever, he had some quirks. He was overweight, afflicted with tics and
health problems, andso tightly wound that hewandered the haUs with
clenched fists. He also could be argumentative. In deaUng with Jobs,
that could be good or bad.
Wozniak quickly embraced the idea of hiring Scott. Like Mark
kula, he hated deaUng with the conflicts that Jobs engendered. Jobs,
not surprisingly, had more conflicted emotions. "I was only twentytwo, and I knew I wasn't ready to run a real company," he said. "But
Apple was mybaby, andI didn't wantto give it up." ReUnquishing any
control was agonizing to him. He wrestled with the issue over long
lunches at Bob's Big Boy hamburgers (Woz's favorite place) andat the
Good Earth restaurant (Jobs's). He finaUy acquiesced, reluctantly.
Mike Scott, caUed "Scotty" to distinguish him from Mike Mark
kula, had one primary duty: managing Jobs. This was usuaUy accompUshed byJobs's preferred mode of meeting, which was taking a walk
together. "My very first walk was to teU him to bathe more often,"

TheApple II

83

Scott recaUed. "He said that in exchange I had to read his fruitarian
diet book and consider it as a wayto loseweight." Scott neveradopted
the diet or lost much weight, andJobs made onlyminor modifications
to his hygiene. "Steve was adamant that he bathed once a week, and
that was adequate as long as he was eating a fruitarian diet."
Jobs's desire for controland disdain for authoritywasdestinedto be
a problem with the manwhowas broughtin to be his regent, especiaUy
whenJobs discovered that Scottwas one of the onlypeople he had yet
encountered who would not bend to his wiU. "The question between
Steve and me was who could be moststubborn, and I was prettygood
at that," Scott said. "He needed to be sat on, and he sure didn't Uke

that."Jobs later said, "I never yeUed at anyone more than I yeUed at
Scotty."
An early showdown came over employee badge numbers. Scott as
signed #1 to Wozniak and#2 toJobs. Not surprisingly, Jobsdemanded
to be #1. "I wouldn't let him have it, because that would stoke his ego
even more," said Scott. Jobs threw a tantrum, even cried. FinaUy, he
proposed a solution. He would have badge #0. Scott relented, at least
forthe purpose of the badge, but the BankofAmerica required a posi
tiveinteger for its payroU system andJobs's remained #2.

There was a more fundamental disagreement that went beyond
personal petulance. Jay EUiot, who was hired by Jobs after a chance
meeting in a restaurant, noted Jobs's saUent trait: "His obsession is a

passion for the product, a passion for product perfection." Mike Scott,
on the otherhand, never let a passion for the perfect take precedence
over pragmatism. The design of the Apple II case was one of many
examples. The Pantone company, which Apple used to specify colors
for its plastic, had more than two thousand shades of beige. "None
of them were good enough for Steve," Scott marveled. "He wanted
to create a different shade, and I had to stop him." When the time
came to tweak the design of the case, Jobs spent days agonizing over
just how rounded the corners should be. "I didn't care how rounded

they were," said Scott, "I just wanted it decided." Another dispute
was over engineering benches. Scottwanted a standard gray; Jobs in

sisted on special-order benches thatwere pure white. AU of this finaUy
led to a showdown in front of Markkula about whether Jobs or Scott

84

Walter Isaacson

had the powerto signpurchase orders; Markkulasidedwith Scott.Jobs
also insisted that Apple be different in how it treated customers. He
wanted a one-yearwarrantyto come with the Apple II. This flabber
gasted Scott;the usualwarrantywas ninety days. AgainJobs dissolved
into tears during one of their arguments over the issue. They walked
around the parking lot to calm down, and Scott decided to relent on
this one.

Wozniak began to rankle at Jobs's style. "Steve was too tough on
people. I wanted our company to feel Uke a famUy where we aU had
fun and shared whatever we made." Jobs, for his part, felt that Woz
niaksimply would not grow up."He was verychUdUke. He did a great
version of BASIC, but then never could buckle down and write the

floating-point BASIC we needed, so we ended up later having to
make a dealwith Microsoft. He wasjust too unfocused."
But for the time being the personaUty clashes were manageable,
mainly because the company was doingsoweU. Ben Rosen, the analyst
whose newsletters shaped the opinions of the tech world, became an
enthusiastic proselytizer for the Apple II. An independent developer
came up with the first spreadsheet and personal finance program for
personal computers, VisiCalc, and for a while it was avaUable only on
the Apple II, turning the computer intosomething that businesses and
famiUes could justifybuying. The company began attracting influen
tial newinvestors. The pioneering venture capitaUst Arthur Rockhad
initiaUy been unimpressed when Markkula sentJobs to see him. "He
looked as if he had just come back from seeing that guru he had in
India," Rock recaUed, "and he kind of smeUed that waytoo." But after
Rock scoped out the Apple II, he made an investment andjoinedthe
board.

The Apple II would be marketed, in various models, for the next
sixteen years, with close to six miUion sold. More than anyother ma
chine, it launched the personal computer industry. Wozniak deserves
the historic credit for the design of its awe-inspiring circuit board and
related operating software, which was one of the era's great feats of
solo invention. But Jobs was the one who integrated Wozniak's boards
into a friendly package, from the power supply to the sleek case. He
also created the company that sprang up around Wozniak's machines.

TheApple II

85

As Regis McKenna later said, "Woz designed a great machine, but
it would be sitting in hobby shops today were it not for Steve Jobs."
Nevertheless most people considered the Apple II to be Wozniak's
creation. That would spur Jobs to pursue the next great advance, one
that he could caU his own.

CHAPTER

SEVEN

CHRISANN AND LISA
He Who Is Abandoned .. .

Ever since theyhad Uved together in a cabin during the summer after
he graduated from high school, Chrisann Brennan had woven in and
out of Jobs's life. When he returned from India in 1974, they spent

time together at Robert Friedland's farm. "Steve invited me up there,
andwewere justyoung andeasy andfree," she recaUed. "There was an
energy therethat went to myheart."
When they moved back to Los Altos, their relationship drifted
into being, for the most part, merely friendly. He Uved at home and
worked at Atari; she had a smaU apartment and spent a lot of time at
Kobun Chino's Zen center. Byearly 1975 shehad beguna relationship
with a mutual friend, Greg Calhoun. "She was with Greg, but went
back to Steve occasionaUy," according to EUzabeth Holmes. "That
was pretty much the way it was with aU of us. We were sort of shift
ingbackand forth; it was the seventies, after aU."
Calhoun had been at Reed with Jobs, Friedland, Kottke, and
Holmes. Like the others, he became deeply involved with Eastern

spirituaUty, dropped out of Reed, and found his way to Friedland's
farm. There he moved into an eight- bytwenty-foot chicken coop that
he converted into a Uttle house by raising it onto cinderblocks and

buUding a sleeping loft inside. In the spring of 1975 Brennan moved
86

Chrisann and Lisa

87

in with him, and the next year they decided to make their own pUgrimage to India. Jobs advisedCalhoun not to take Brennan with him,

saying that she would interfere with his spiritual quest, but theywent
together anyway. "I was just so impressed by what happened to Steve
on his trip to India that I wanted to go there," she said.
Theirs was a serious trip, beginning in March 1976 and lasting
almost a year. At one point they ran out of money, so Calhoun hitch
hiked to Iran to teach EngUsh in Tehran. Brennan stayed in India,
and when Calhoun's teaching stint was over they hitchhiked to meet
each otherin the middle, in Afghanistan. The world was a very differ
ent placeback then.

After a whUe their relationship frayed, and they returned from
India separately. By the summer of 1977 Brennan had moved back

to Los Altos, where she lived for a whUe in a tent on the grounds of
Kobun ChinosZen center. By this time Jobs hadmoved outofhis par
ents' house and was renting a $600 per month suburban ranch house
in Cupertino with Daniel Kottke. It was an oddscene of free-spirited
hippie types Uving in a tract house they dubbed Rancho Suburbia.
"It was a four-bedroom house, and we occasionaUy rented one of the
bedrooms out to aU sorts of crazy people, including a stripper for a
whUe," recaUed Jobs. Kottke couldn't quite figure out why Jobs had
not just gotten his own house, which he could have afforded by then.
"I thinkhejustwanted to have a roommate," Kottke speculated.
Even though her relationship with Jobs was sporadic, Brennan
soon moved in as weU. Thismade for a setofUving arrangements wor
thy of a French farce. The house had two big bedrooms and two tiny
ones. Jobs, not surprisingly, commandeered the largest of them, and
Brennan (who was not reaUy Uving with him) moved into the other
big bedroom. "The two middle rooms wereUke for babies, and I didn't

want either of them, so I moved into the Uving room and slept on a
foam pad," said Kottke. They turned one ofthe smaU rooms into space
for meditating and dropping acid, Uke the attic space they had used
at Reed. It was fiUed with foam packing material from Apple boxes.
"Neighborhood kids used to come over and we would toss them in it

and it was great fun," said Kottke, "but then Chrisann brought home
some cats who peedin the foam, and then we had to get rid of it."

88

Walter Isaacson

Living in the house at times rekindled the physical relationship
between Brennan and Jobs, and within a few months she was preg
nant."Steve and I werein and out of a relationship for five years before
I got pregnant," she said. "We didn't know howto be togetherand we
didn't know how to be apart." When Greg Calhoun hitchhiked from
Colorado to visit them on Thanksgiving 1977, Brennan told him the
news: "Steve and I got back together, and nowI'm pregnant, but now
we are on again and off again, and I don'tknow what to do."
Calhoun noticed that Jobs was disconnected from the whole sit
uation. He even tried to convince Calhoun to stay with them and
come to work at Apple. "Steve was just not deaUng with Chrisann or
the pregnancy," he recaUed. "He could bevery engaged withyou in one
moment, but then very disengaged. There was a side to him that was
frighteningly cold."
When Jobs did not want to deal with a distraction, he sometimes
just ignored it, as if he could wiU it out of existence. At times he was
able to distort reaUty not just for others but even for himself. In the
case of Brennan's pregnancy, he simply shut it out of his mind.When
confronted, hewould deny that he knew hewas the father, even though
he admitted that he had been sleeping with her. "I wasn't sure it was

my kid, because I was pretty sure I wasn't the only one she was sleeping
with,"he told me later. "Sheand I were not reaUy even going out when
she got pregnant. She just had a room in our house." Brennan had no
doubt that Jobs was the father. She had not been involved with Greg
or any other men at the time.
Was he lying to himself, or didhe not know that hewas the father?

"Ijustthinkhecouldn't access thatpartofhis brain ortheidea ofbeing
responsible," Kottke said. EUzabeth Holmes agreed: "He considered
the option of parenthood and considered the option of not being a
parent, and he decided to beUeve the latter. He had other plans for
hisUfe."

There was no discussion of marriage. "I knew that shewas not the
person I wanted to marry, and we would never behappy, and itwouldn't
lastlong," Jobs latersaid. "I was aU in favor of her getting an abortion,
but she didn't knowwhat to do. She thought about it repeatedly and
decided not to, or I don't know that she ever reaUy decided—I think

Chrisann and Lisa

89

time just decided for her." Brennan told me that it was her choice to

have the baby: "He said he was fine with an abortion but never pushed
for it." Interestingly, given his own background, he was adamantly
against one option. "He strongly discouraged me putting the chUd up
for adoption," she said.

There was a disturbing irony. Jobs and Brennan were both twentythree, the same age thatJoanne Schieble andAbdulfattah Jandali had

been when they had Jobs. He had not yet tracked down his biological
parents, but his adoptive parents had told him some of their tale. "I

didn't know then about this coincidence of our ages, so it didn't af
fect my discussions with Chrisann," he later said. He dismissed the

notion that he was somehow foUowing his biological father's pattern
of getting his girlfriend pregnant when he was twenty-three, but he
did admit that the ironic resonance gave him pause. "When I didfind
outthat hewas twenty-three when hegotJoanne pregnant with me, I
thought, whoa!"

The relationship between Jobs and Brennan quickly deteriorated.
"Chrisann would get into this kind of victim mode, when she would
say that Steve and I were ganging up on her," Kottke recaUed. "Steve
would just laugh and not take her seriously." Brennan was not, as even

she later admitted, very emotionaUy stable. She began breaking plates,
throwing things, trashing the house, and writing obscene words in
charcoal on the waU. She said thatJobs kept provoking her with his
caUousness: "Hewas an enUghtened being who was cruel." Kottke was
caught in the middle. "Daniel didn't have that DNA of ruthlessness,
so hewas a bitflipped bySteve's behavior," according to Brennan. "He

would go from 'Steve's not treating you right' to laughing at me with
Steve."

Robert Friedland came to her rescue. "He heard that I was preg
nant, and he said to come on up to the farm to have the baby," she
recaUed. "So I did." EUzabeth Holmes and other friends were stiU Uv

ing there, and they found an Oregon midwife tohelp with the deUvery.
On May 17,1978, Brennan gave birth to a baby girl. Three days later
Jobs flew up tobe with them and help name the new baby. Thepractice
onthecommune was to give chUdren Eastern spiritual names, butJobs
insisted that she had been born in America and ought to have a name

90

Walter Isaacson

that fit. Brennan agreed. They named her Lisa Nicole Brennan, not

giving her the last name Jobs. And then he left to go back to work at
Apple. "He didn't want to have anything to do with her or with me,"
said Brennan.

She and Lisa moved to a tiny, dUapidated house in backof a home
in Menlo Park. They Uved on welfare because Brennan did not feel

up to suing for chUd support. FinaUy, the County ofSan Mateo sued
Jobs to tryto prove paternity and get him to take financial responsibU
ity. At first Jobs was determined to fight the case. Hislawyers wanted
Kottke to testify that he hadnever seen them in bedtogether, andthey
tried to Une up evidence that Brennan had been sleeping with other
men. "At one point I yeUed at Steve on the phone, Tou know that is
not true,'" Brennan recaUed. "He was going to drag me through court
with a Uttle baby and tryto prove I was awhore andthat anyone could
have been the father of that baby."

A year after Lisa was born, Jobs agreed to take a paternity test.
Brennan's famUy was surprised, butJobs knew that Apple would soon
be going pubUc and he decided it was best to get the issue resolved.
DNA tests were new, and the one that Jobs took was done at UCLA.

"I had read about DNA testing, and I was happy to do it to get things
settled," he said. The results were pretty dispositive. "ProbabiUty of

paternity... is 94.41%," the report read. The California courts ordered
Jobs to start paying $385 a month in child support, sign an agreement

admitting paternity, and reimburse the county $5,856 in back welfare
payments. He was given visitation rights but for a long time didn't
exercise them.

EventhenJobs continued at times to warp the reaUty around him.
"He finaUy told us on the board," Arthur Rock recaUed, "but he kept
insisting that there was a large probabiUty that he wasn't the father.
He was delusional." He told a reporter for Time, Michael Moritz,

that when you analyzed the statistics, it was clear that "28% of the
male population in the United States could be the father." It was not
only a false claim but anodd one. Worse yet, when Chrisann Brennan
later heardwhat he said, she mistakenly thought that Jobs was hyper-

boUcaUy claiming that she might have slept with 28% of the men in
the United States. "He was trying to paint me as a slut or a whore,"

Chrisann and Lisa

91

she recaUed. "He spun the whore image onto me in order to not take
responsibUity."

Years laterJobs was remorseful for the way he behaved, one of the
few times in his Ufe he admitted as much:

I wish I had handled it differendy. I could not see myself as a father
then, so I didnt face up to it. But when the test results showed she was

my daughter, it's nottrue thatI doubted it.I agreed to support heruntil
she was eighteen and give some money to Chrisann as weU. I found a
house in Palo Alto andfixed it up andlet them live there rent-free. Her

mother found hergreat schools which I paid for. I tried to do the right
thing. Butif I could doit over, I would doa better job.

Once the case was resolved, Jobs began to move on with his Ufe—
maturing in some respects, though not aU. He put aside drugs, eased
away from being a strict vegan, and cut back the time hespent on Zen
retreats. He began getting stylish haircuts and buying suits and shirts
from the upscale San Francisco haberdashery Wilkes Bashford. And
he settled into a serious relationship with one ofRegis McKenna's em
ployees, a beautiful Polynesian-PoUsh woman named Barbara Jasinski.
There was stiU, to be sure, a chUdUke rebeUious streak in him. He,
Jasinski, and Kottke Uked to go skinny-dipping in Felt Lake on the
edge of Interstate 280 near Stanford, and he bought a 1966 BMW
R60/2 motorcycle that he adorned with orange tassels on the han
dlebars. He could also stiU be bratty. He beUttled waitresses and fre

quently returned food with the proclamation that it was "garbage." At
the company's first HaUoween party, in 1979, he dressed in robes as
Jesus Christ, an act of semi-ironic self-awareness that he considered

fiinny but that caused a lot ofeye rolUng. Even his initial stirrings of
domesticity had some quirks. He bought a proper house in the Los

Gatos hiUs, which he adorned with a Maxfield Parrish painting, a
Braun coffeemaker,and Henckels knives. But because he was so obses

sive when it came to selecting furnishings, it remained mostly barren,
lackingbeds or chairs or couches. Instead his bedroom had a mattress

in the center, framed pictures ofEinstein and Maharaj-ji onthe waUs,
and an Apple II on the floor.

CHAPTER

EIGHT

XEROX AND LISA
Graphical User Interfaces

A New Baby

The Apple II took the company from Jobs's garage to the pinnacle
of a new industry. Its sales rose dramaticaUy, from 2,500 units in 1977
to 210,000 in 1981. But Jobswas restless. The Apple II could not re
main successful forever, and he knewthat, no matter how much he had

done to package it, from power cord to case, it would always be seen
as Wozniak's masterpiece. He needed his own machine. More than
that, hewanted a product thatwould, in his words, make a dent in the
universe.

At first he hoped thatthe Apple III would play that role. It would
have more memory, the screen would display eightycharacters across

rather than forty, and it would handle uppercase and lowercase let
ters. Indulging his passion for industrial design, Jobs decreed the size
and shape of the external case, and he refused to let anyone alter it,
even as committees ofengineers added more components to the circuit
boards. The result was piggybacked boards with poor connectors that
frequently faUed. Whenthe Apple III began shipping in May 1980, it

flopped. Randy Wigginton, one ofthe engineers, summed it up: "The
Apple III was kind ofUke a baby conceived during a group orgy, and
92

Xerox and Lisa

93

later everybody had this bad headache, and there's this bastard chUd,
and everyone says, It's not mine.'"

By then Jobs had distanced himself from the Apple III and was
thrashing about for ways to produce something more radicaUy differ
ent. At firsthe flirtedwith the ideaof touchscreens, but he found him

selffrustrated. At one demonstration ofthe technology, hearrived late,
fidgeted awhUe, then abruptly cut offthe engineers in the middle of
their presentation with a brusque "Thank you." They were confused.
"Would you Uke us to leave?" one asked. Jobs said yes, then berated his
coUeagues for wasting his time.

Then he and Apple hired two engineers from Hewlett-Packard to
conceive a totaUy new computer. The name Jobs chose for it would

have caused even the most jaded psychiatrist to do a double take: the

Lisa. Other computers had been named after daughters of their de
signers, but Lisa was a daughter Jobs had abandoned and had not

yet fiiUy admitted was his. "Maybe he was doing it out ofguUt," said
Andrea Cunningham, who worked atRegis McKenna on pubUc rela
tions for the project. "We had to come up with an acronym so that
we could claim it was not named after Lisa the chUd." The one they
reverse-engineered was "local integrated systems architecture," and

despite being meaningless it became the official explanation for the
name. Among the engineers itwas referred to as "Lisa: invented stupid
acronym." Years later, when I asked about the name, Jobs admitted
simply, "Obviously it was named for my daughter."
The Lisa was conceived as a $2,000 machine based on a sixteen-

bit microprocessor, rather than the eight-bit one used in the Apple II.
Without the wizardry ofWozniak, who was stiU working quietly on
the Apple II, the engineers began producing a straightforward com
puter with a conventional text display, unable to push the powerful
microprocessor to do much exciting stuff. Jobs began to grow impa
tient with how boring it was turning outto be.

There was, however, one programmer who was infusing the project
with some Ufe: BiU Atkinson. He was a doctoral student in neuroscience who had experimented with hisfair share of acid. When he was

asked to come work for Apple, he decUned. But then Apple sent him a
nonrefundable plane ticket, and he decided to use it and let Jobs try to

94

Walter Isaacson

persuade him. "We are inventing thefuture," Jobs told him at the end
ofa three-hour pitch. "Thinkabout surfing on the frontedge ofawave.
It'sreaUy exhUarating. Now think about dog-paddUng at the taU endof
that wave. It wouldn't be anywhere near asmuch fun. Comedown here
and make a dent in the universe." Atkinson did.

With his shaggy hair anddroopy moustache that did not hide the
animation in his face, Atkinson had some of Woz's ingenuity along

with Jobs's passion for awesome products. His first jobwas to develop
a program to track a stock portfoUo by auto-diaUng the Dow Jones
service, getting quotes, then hanging up. "I had to create it fast be
cause there was a magazine ad for the Apple II showing a hubby at
the kitchen table looking at anApple screen fiUed withgraphs ofstock
prices, and his wife is beaming at him—but there wasn't such a pro
gram, so I had to create one." Next he created for the Apple II a ver
sion of Pascal, a high-level programming language. Jobs had resisted,

thinking that BASIC was aU the Apple II needed, buthe told Atkin
son, "Since you're so passionate about it, I'll give you six days to prove
me wrong." He did, and Jobs respected him ever after.
By the faU of1979 Apple was breeding three ponies to be potential
successors tothe Apple II workhorse. There was the Ul-fated Apple III.
There was the Lisa project, which was beginning to disappoint Jobs.
And somewhere offJobs's radar screen, at least for the moment, there
was a smaU skunkworks project for a low-cost machine thatwas being

developed by acolorful employee namedJefRaskin, aformer professor
who had taught BiU Atkinson. Raskin's goal was to make aninexpen
sive "computer for the masses" that would be Uke an appUance—
a self-contained unitwith computer, keyboard, monitor, and software
aU together—and have a graphical interface. He tried to turn his col
leagues at Apple on to a cutting-edge research center, right in Palo
Alto, that was pioneering such ideas.

Xerox PARC

TheXerox Corporation's Palo Alto Research Center, known as Xerox
PARC, hadbeen estabUshed in 1970 to create a spawning ground for

Xerox and Lisa

95

digital ideas. It was safely located, for better and for worse, three thou

sand mUes from the commercial pressures of Xerox corporate head
quarters in Connecticut. Among its visionaries was the scientist Alan

Kay, who had two great maxims thatJobs embraced: "The best way to
predict the future is to invent it" and "People who are serious about
software should make their own hardware." Kay pushed the vision of
a smaU personal computer, dubbed the "Dynabook," that would be
easy enough for chUdren to use. So Xerox PARC's engineers began to
develop user-friendly graphics that could replace aU of the command
Unes and DOS prompts thatmade computer screens intimidating. The
metaphor they came up with was that of a desktop. The screen could
have many documents and folders onit, and you could use a mouse to
point and clickon the one youwanted to use.

This graphical user interface—or GUI, pronounced "gooey"—was
faciUtated by another concept pioneered atXerox PARC: bitmapping.
UntU then, most computers were character-based. You would type a
character on a keyboard, and the computer would generate that char
acter on the screen, usuaUy in glowing greenish phosphor against a
dark background. Since there were a Umited number of letters, nu

merals, and symbols, it didn't take a whole lot of computer code or
processing power Jo accompUsh this. In a bitmap system, on the other
hand, each and every pixel on the screen is controUed by bits in the
computer's memory. To render something on the screen, such as a let
ter, thecomputer has to teU each pixel to be Ught ordark or, in thecase

ofcolor displays, what color to be. This uses alot ofcomputing power,
but it permits gorgeous graphics, fonts, and gee-whiz screen displays.
Bitmapping and graphical interfaces became features of Xerox

PARC's prototype computers, such as the Alto, and its object-oriented
programming language, SmaUtalk. Jef Raskin decided that these fea

tures were the future ofcomputing. So hebegan urging Jobs andother
Apple coUeagues to go check outXerox PARC.
Raskin had one problem: Jobs regarded him as an insufferable

theorist or, to use Jobs's own more precise terminology, "a shithead
who sucks." So Raskin enUsted his friend Atkinson, who feU on the
other side ofJobs's shithead/genius division of the world, to convince

Jobs to take aninterest inwhat was happening atXerox PARC. What

96

Walter Isaacson

Raskin didn't knowwas thatJobswas working on a morecomplex deal.
Xerox's venture capital division wanted to be part of the second round

of Apple financing during the summer of 1979. Jobs made an offer:
"I wiU let you invest a miUion doUars in Apple if you wiU open the
kimono at PARC." Xerox accepted. It agreed to show Apple its new
technology andin return gotto buy 100,000 shares at about $10 each.
By thetime Apple went pubUc ayear later, Xerox's $1 miUion worth
of shares were worth $17.6 miUion. ButApple got the better end of the

bargain. Jobs and his coUeagues went to see Xerox PARC's technol
ogy in December 1979 and, when Jobs reaUzed he hadn't been shown
enough, got aneven fuUer demonstration a few days later. Larry Tesler
was one of the Xerox scientists caUed upon to do the briefings, and
he was thriUed to show off the work that his bosses back east had

never seemed to appreciate. Butthe other briefer, Adele Goldberg, was
appaUed thather company seemed wiUing to give away its crown jew
els. "It was incredibly stupid, completely nuts, and I fought to prevent
giving Jobs much of anything," she recaUed.
Goldberg got her way at the first briefing. Jobs, Raskin, and the
Lisateamleader John Couch were ushered into the mainlobby, where
a Xerox Alto hadbeen set up. "It was a very controUed show of a few

appUcations, primarily a word-processing one," Goldberg said. Jobs
wasn't satisfied, and he caUed Xerox headquarters demanding more.
So he was invited back a few days later, and this time he brought

a larger team that included BiU Atkinson and Bruce Horn, an Apple
programmer who had worked atXerox PARC. They both knew what
to look for. "When I arrived at work, there was a lot of commotion,

and I was told thatJobs and a bunch of his programmers were in the
conference room," said Goldberg. One of her engineers was trying to
keep them entertained with more displays oftheword-processing pro

gram. But Jobs was growing impatient. "Let's stop this buUshit!" he
kept shouting. So the Xerox folks huddled privately and decided to
open the kimono a bit more, but only slowly. They agreed that Tesler
could show off SmaUtalk, the programming language, but he would
demonstrate only what was known as the"unclassified" version. "ItwiU
dazzle [Jobs] and he'U never know he didn't get the confidential dis
closure," the head of the team told Goldberg.

Xerox and Lisa

97

They were wrong. Atkinson and others had read some ofthepapers
published byXerox PARC, so they knew they were not getting a fuU
description. Jobs phoned thehead oftheXerox venture capital division
to complain; a caU immediately came back from corporate headquar
ters in Connecticut decreeing thatJobs and his group should be shown
everything. Goldberg stormed out in a rage.
When Tesler finaUy showed them what was truly under the hood,
the Apple folks were astonished. Atkinson stared at the screen, exam
ining eachpixel so closely that Tesler could feel the breath on his neck.

Jobs bounced around and waved his arms excitedly. "He was hopping
around so much I don't know how he actuaUy saw most of the demo,
but he did, because he kept asking questions," Tesler recaUed. "He was

the exclamation point for every step I showed." Jobs kept saying that
he couldn't believe that Xerox had not commercialized the technology.
"You're sittingon a gold mine," he shouted. "I can't beUeve Xerox is not
taking advantage of this."

The SmaUtalk demonstration showed three amazing features. One
was how computers could be networked; the second was how objectoriented programming worked. But Jobs and his team paid Uttle at
tention to these attributes because they were so amazed by the third

feature, the graphical interface that was made possible by abitmapped
screen. "It was Uke a veU being Ufted from my eyes," Jobs recaUed. "I
could see what the future ofcomputing was destined to be."
When the Xerox PARC meeting ended after more than two hours,
Jobs drove BUI Atkinson back to the Apple office in Cupertino. He was
speeding, and so were his mind and mouth. "This is it!" he shouted,

emphasizing each word. "We've got to do it!" It was the breakthrough
he had been looking for: bringing computers to the people, with the
cheerful but affordable design of an Eichler home and the ease of use
of a sleek kitchen appUance.

"How long would this take to implement?" he asked.
"I'm not sure," Atkinson repUed. "Maybe six months." It was a

wUdly optimistic assessment, but also a motivating one.

98

Walter Isaacson

"GreatArtists Steal"

The Apple raid onXerox PARC is sometimes described as one of the
biggest heists in the chronicles ofindustry. Jobs occasionaUy endorsed
this view, with pride. As he once said, "Picasso had a saying—'good
artists copy, great artists steal'—and we have always been shameless
about steaUng greatideas."
Another assessment, also sometimes endorsed byJobs, is that what

transpired was less a heist by Apple than a fumble by Xerox. "They
were copier-heads who had no clue about what a computer could do,"
he said of Xerox's management. "They just grabbed defeat from the
greatest victory in the computer industry. Xerox could have owned
the entire computer industry."
Both assessments contain a lot of truth, but there is more to it than
that. There faUs a shadow, asT. S. EUot noted, between the conception
and the creation. In the annals of innovation, new ideas are only part

of the equation. Execution isjust asimportant.

Jobs and his engineers significandy improved the graphical inter
face ideas they saw atXerox PARC, and then were able to implement
them in ways that Xerox never could accompUsh. For example, the
Xerox mouse had three buttons, was compUcated, cost $300 apiece,
and didn't roU around smoothly; a few days after his second Xerox

PARC visit, Jobs went to a local industrial design firm, IDEO, and
toldone of its founders, Dean Hovey, that he wanted a simple singlebutton modelthat cost $15,"andI want to be ableto use it on Formica

and my blue jeans." Hovey compUed.
The improvements were in not just the detaUs but the entire con

cept. The mouse atXerox PARC could not be used to drag awindow
around the screen. Apple's engineers devised an interface so you could
not only drag windows and files around, you could even drop them
into folders. The Xerox system required you to select a command in
order to do anything, ranging from resizing a window to changing
the extension that located a file. The Apple system transformed the

desktop metaphor into virtual reaUty by aUowing you todirectly touch,

Xerox and Lisa

99

manipulate, drag, and relocate things. And Apple's engineers worked
in tandem with its designers—with Jobs spurring them on daUy—to
improve the desktop concept by adding deUghtfiil icons and menus
that puUed down from a bar atop each window and the capabiUty to
open files and folders with a double cUck.

It's not as if Xerox executives ignored what their scientists had
created at PARC. In fact they did try to capitaUze on it, and in the

process they showed why good execution is as important as good ideas.
In 1981, weU before the Apple Lisa or Macintosh, they introduced
the Xerox Star, a machine thatfeatured their graphical user interface,
mouse, bitmapped display, windows, and desktop metaphor. But it
was clunky (itcould take minutes to save a large file), costly ($16,595
at retaU stores), and aimed mainly at the networked office market. It
flopped; onlythirty thousand were ever sold.
Jobs and his team went to a Xerox dealer to look at the Star as
soon as it was released. But he deemed it so worthless that he told his

coUeagues they couldn't spend the money to buy one. "We were very
reUeved," he recaUed. "We knew they hadn't done it right, and that
we could—at a fraction of the price." A few weeks later he caUed Bob
BeUeviUe, one ofthe hardware designers on the Xerox Star team. "Ev

erything you've ever done in your life is shit," Jobs said, "so why don't
you come work for me?" BeUeviUe did, and so did Larry Tesler.

In his excitement,Jobs began to take over the daily management of
the Lisa project, which was being run byJohn Couch, the former HP
engineer. Ignoring Couch, he dealt directly with Atkinson and Tesler

to insert his own ideas, especiaUy on Lisa's graphical interface design.
"He would caU me at aU hours, 2 a.m. or 5 a.m.," said Tesler. "I loved

it. But it upset my bosses at the Lisa division." Jobs was told to stop
making out-of-channel caUs. Heheld himselfback for awhile, butnot
for long.
One important showdown occurred when Atkinson decided that

the screen should have a white background rather than a dark one.
This would aUow an attribute that both Atkinson and Jobs wanted:

WYSIWYG, pronounced "wiz-ee-wig," an acronym for "What you
see is what you get." What you saw on the screen was what you'd get

100

Walter Isaacson

when you printed it out. "The hardware team screamed bloody mur
der," Atkinson recaUed. "They saidit wouldforce us to use a phosphor
that was a lot less persistent andwould flicker more." SoAtkinson en
Usted Jobs, who came down on his side. The hardware folks grumbled,
but then wentoffandfigured it out."Steve wasn't muchof an engineer
himself, but he was very good at assessing people's answers. He could
teU whether the engineers were defensive or unsure of themselves."
One of Atkinson's amazing feats (which we are so accustomed to

nowadays that we rarely marvel at it) was to aUow the windows on a
screen to overlap so that the "top" one cUpped into the ones "below"
it.Atkinson made it possible to move these windows around, justUke

shuffling papers on a desk, with those below becoming visible orhid
den as you moved the top ones. Ofcourse, on a computer screen there
are no layers of pixels underneath the pixels that you see, so there
are no windows actuaUy lurking underneath the ones that appear to

be on top. To create the Ulusion ofoverlapping windows requires com

plex coding that involves what are caUed "regions." Atkinson pushed
himself to make this trick work because he thought he had seen this

capabiUty during his visit to Xerox PARC. Infact the folks at PARC
had never accompUshed it, and they later told him they were amazed
that he had done so. "I got a feeUng for the empowering aspect of
naivete," Atkinson said. "Because I didn't know it couldn't be done,
I was enabled to do it." He was working so hard that one morning,

in a daze, he drove his Corvette into a parked truck and nearly kiUed
himself. Jobs immediately drove to the hospital to see him. "We were

pretty worried about you," he said when Atkinson regained conscious
ness. Atkinson gave him a pained smUe and repUed, "Don't worry, I
stiU remember regions."

Jobs also had a passion for smooth scroUing. Documents should
not lurch Une by Une as you scroU through them, but instead should
flow. "He was adamant that everything onthe interface had agood feel

ing to the user," Atkinson said. They also wanted a mouse that could
easUy move the cursor in any direction, not just up-down/left-right.
This required using a baU rather than the usual two wheels. One of
the engineers told Atkinson that there was no way to buUd such a
mouse commerciaUy. After Atkinson complained toJobs over dinner,

Xerox and Lisa

101

he arrived at the office the next day to discover thatJobs hadfired the
engineer. When his replacement metAtkinson, hisfirst words were, "I
can build the mouse."

Atkinson and Jobs became best friends for awhUe, eating together
at the Good Earth most nights. But John Couch and the other pro
fessional engineers on his Lisa team, many of them buttoned-down
HP types, resented Jobs's meddUng and were infuriated by his fre
quent insults. There was also a clash of visions. Jobs wanted to buUd
a VblksLisa, a simple and inexpensive product for the masses. "There
was a tug-of-war between people Uke me, who wanted a lean machine,

and those from HP, Uke Couch, who were aiming for the corporate
market," Jobs recaUed.

Both Mike Scott and Mike Markkula were intent on bringing
some order to Apple and became increasingly concerned about Jobs's

disruptive behavior. So in September 1980, they secretly plotted a re
organization. Couch was made the undisputed manager of the Lisa
division. Jobs lost control of the computer he had named after his
daughter. He was also stripped ofhis role as vice president for research
and development. He was made non-executive chairmanof the board.

This position aUowed him to remain Apple's pubUc face, but it meant
that he had no operating control. That hurt. "I was upset and felt aban
doned by Markkula," he said. "He and Scotty felt I wasn't up to run
ning the Lisa division. I brooded about it a lot."

CHAPTER

NINE

GOING PUBLIC
A Man of Wealth and Fame

With Wozniak, 1981

Options
When Mike Markkula joinedJobs and Wozniak toturn their fledgUng

partnership into the Apple Computer Co. in January 1977, they val
uedit at $5,309. Less than four years later they decided it was time to

take it pubUc. It would become the most oversubscribed initial pubUc
offering since that ofFord Motors in 1956. By the end ofDecember
102

Going Public

103

1980, Apple would be valued at $1.79 billion. Yes, billion. In the pro
cess it would make three hundred people millionaires.
Daniel Kottke was not one of them. He hadbeen Jobs s soul mate

in college, inIndia, atthe All One Farm, and inthe rental house they
shared during the Chrisann Brennan crisis. He joined Apple when
it was headquartered in Jobs s garage, and he still worked there as an

hourly employee. But he was not atahigh enough level to be cut in on
the stock options that were awarded before the IPO. "Itotally trusted
Steve, and I assumed he would take care of me like Fd taken care of

him, so I didn't push," said Kottke. The official reason he wasn't given
stock options was that hewas an hourly technician, not a salaried en
gineer, which was the cutoff level for options. Even so, he could have
justifiably been given "founders stock," butJobs decided not to. "Steve

is the opposite ofloyal," according to Andy Hertzfeld, an early Apple
engineerwho has nevertheless remained friends with him. "He's anti-

loyal. He has to abandon the people heis close to."

Kottke decided to press his case with Jobs by hovering outside his
office and catching him to make a plea. But at each encounter, Jobs
brushed him off. "What was really so difficult for me is that Steve
never told me I wasn't eligible," recalled Kottke. "He owed me that as
a friend. When I would ask him about stock, hewould tell me I hadto

talk to my manager." Finally, almost six months after the IPO, Kottke
worked up the courage to march into Jobs's office and try to hash out
the issue. Butwhen hegotin to see him, Jobs was so cold that Kottke
froze. "I just got choked up and began to cry and just couldn't talk to
him," Kottke recalled. "Our friendship was all gone. It was so sad."

Rod Holt, the engineer who had built the power supply, was get
tinga lot of options, andhe tried to turnJobs around. "We have to do

something for your buddy Daniel," he said, and he suggested they each
give him some oftheir own options. "Whatever you give him, I will
match it," said Holt. Replied Jobs, "Okay. I will give him zero."
Wozniak, not surprisingly, had the opposite attitude. Before the
shares went public, he decided to sell, at avery low price, two thousand
ofhis options to forty different midlevel employees. Most ofhis ben
eficiaries made enough to buy ahome. Wozniak bought adream home

104

Walter Isaacson

for himself and his new wife, but she soon divorced him and kept the

house. He also later gave shares outright to employees hefelt hadbeen
shortchanged, including Kottke, Fernandez,Wigginton, and Espinosa.
Everyone loved Wozniak, all the more so after his generosity, butmany

also agreed with Jobs that he was "awfully naive and childlike." A few
months later a United Way poster showing a destitute man went up

on a company bulletin board. Someone scrawled on it "Woz in 1990."
Jobs was notnaive. Hehad made sure his deal with Chrisann Brennan was signed before theIPO occurred.
Jobs was the public face ofthe IPO, and he helped choose the two
investment banks handling it: thetraditional Wall Street firm Morgan

Stanley and the untraditional boutique firm Hambrecht 8c Quist in
San Francisco. "Steve was very irreverent toward the guys from Mor

gan Stanley, which was a pretty uptight firm in those days," recalled
Bill Hambrecht. Morgan Stanley planned to price the offering at $18,

even though itwas obvious the shares would quickly shoot up. "Tell me
what happens to this stock that we priced at eighteen?" Jobs asked the
bankers. "Don't you sell it toyour good customers? If so, how can you
charge me a 7% commission?" Hambrecht recognized that there was
abasic unfairness inthe system, and he later went onto formulate the
idea of a reverse auction to price shares before an IPO.

Apple went public the morning ofDecember 12, 1980. By then
the bankers had priced the stock at$22 ashare. It went to $29 the first
day. Jobs had come into the Hambrecht 8c Quist office just in time
to watch the opening trades. At age twenty-five, he was now worth
$256 million.

Baby Youre a Rich Man
Before and after he was rich, and indeed throughout a life that in

cluded being both broke and abillionaire, Steve Jobs's attitude toward
wealth was complex. He was an antimaterialistic hippie who capital
ized on the inventions of a friend who wanted to give them away for

free, and he was a Zen devotee who made a pilgrimage to India and

GoingPublic

105

then decided that his calling was to create a business. And yet some
how these attitudes seemed to weave together rather than conflict.

He had agreat love for some material objects, especially those that
were finely designed and crafted, such as Porsche and Mercedes cars,

Henckels knives and Braun appliances, BMW motorcycles and Ansel

Adams prints, Bosendorfer pianos and Bang 8c Olufsen audio equip
ment. Yet thehouses helived in,nomatter how rich hebecame, tended

not to be ostentatious and were furnished so simply they would have
put a Shaker to shame. Neither then nor later would he travel with an

entourage, keep a personal staff, oreven have security protection. He
bought a nice car, but always drove himself. When Markkula asked

Jobs to join him in buying a Lear jet, he declined (though he eventu
ally would demand of Apple a Gulfstream to use). Like his father,
he could be flinty when bargaining with suppliers, but he didn't allow
a craving for profits to take precedence over his passion for building
great products.

Thirty years after Apple went public, he reflected on what it was
like to come into money suddenly:
I never worried about money. I grew up in a middle-class family, so I
neverthought I wouldstarve. And I learned at Atari that I couldbe an

okay engineer, so I always knew I could get by. I was voluntarily poor
when I was in college and India, and I lived a pretty simple life even
when I was working. So I went from fairly poor, which was wonderful,

because I didn't have to worry about money, to being incredibly rich,
when I also didn't have toworry about money.

I watched people at Apple who made alot ofmoney and felt they
had to live differendy. Some ofthem bought aRolls-Royce and various
houses, each with a house manager and then someone to manage the
house managers. Their wives got plastic surgery and turned into these
bizarre people. This was not how I wanted to live. It's crazy. I made a
promise to myselfthat I'm not going to let this money ruin my life.

He was not particularly philanthropic. He briefly set up afounda
tion, but he discovered that it was annoying to have to deal with the

106

Walter Isaacson

person he had hired to run it, who kept talking about "venture" phi
lanthropy and how to "leverage" giving. Jobs became contemptuous

ofpeople who made a display ofphilanthropy or thinking they could
reinvent it.Earlier hehad quietly sent ina $5,000 check to help launch

Larry Brilliant's Seva Foundation to fight diseases ofpoverty, and he
even agreed to join the board. But when Brilliant brought some board
members, including Wavy Gravy and Jerry Garcia, toApple right after
its IPO to solicit a donation, Jobs was not forthcoming. He instead

worked onfinding ways that a donated Apple II and a VisiCalc pro

gram could make iteasier for the foundation to do asurvey itwas plan
ning on blindness in Nepal.

His biggest personal gift was to his parents, Paul and ClaraJobs, to
whom he gave about $750,000 worth ofstock. They sold some to pay
offthe mortgage on their Los Altos home, and their son came over for
the little celebration. "It wasthe firsttime in their lives they didn't have

a mortgage," Jobs recalled. "They had a handful oftheir friends over
for the party, and it was really nice." Still, they didn't consider buying
a nicer house. "They weren't interested in that," Jobs said. "They had
alife they were happy with." Their only splurge was to take a Princess
cruise each year. The one through the Panama Canal "was the big one
for my dad," according to Jobs, because it reminded him ofwhen his
Coast Guard ship went through on its way to San Francisco tobe de
commissioned.

With Apple's success came fame for its poster boy. Inc. became the
first magazine to put him on its cover, in October 1981. "This man
has changed business forever," it proclaimed. It showed Jobs with a
neatly trimmed beard and well-styled long hair, wearing blue jeans and
a dress shirt with a blazer that was a little too satiny. He was leaning

on an Apple II and looking directly into the camera with the mesmer

izing stare he had picked up from Robert Friedland. "When SteveJobs
speaks, it is with the gee-whiz enthusiasm ofsomeone who sees the
future and is making sure it works," the magazine reported.
Time followed in February 1982 witha package onyoung entrepre
neurs. The cover was a painting ofJobs, again with his hypnotic stare.

Jobs, said the main story, "practically singlehanded created the personal

computer industry." The accompanying profile, written by Michael

Going Public

107

Moritz, noted, "At 26, Jobs heads a company that six years ago was
located in a bedroom and garage ofhis parents' house, but this year it
is expected to have sales of $600 million

As an executive, Jobs has

sometimes been petulant and harsh on subordinates. Admits he: I've

got to learn to keep myfeelings private.'"
Despite his new fame and fortune, he still fancied himself a child

of the counterculture. On a visit to a Stanford class, he took off his

Wilkes Bashford blazer and his shoes, perched on top of a table, and
crossed his legs into alotus position. The students asked questions, such
as when Apple's stock price would rise, which Jobs brushed off. Instead

he spoke ofhis passion for future products, such as someday making
a computer as small as a book. When the business questions tapered

off, Jobs turned the tables on the well-groomed students. "How many
ofyou are virgins?" he asked. There were nervous giggles. "How many of
you have taken LSD?" More nervous laughter, and only one or two
hands went up. LaterJobs would complain about the new generation of
kids, who seemed to him more materialistic and careerist than his own.

"When I went to school, it was right after the sixties and before this
general wave ofpractical purposefulness had setin," he said. "Now stu
dents aren't even thinking in idealistic terms, oratleast nowhere near as
much." His generation, he said, was different. "The idealistic wind of

the sixties is still at our backs, though, and most ofthe people I know
who are my age have thatingrained in them forever."

CHAPTER

TEN

THE MAC IS BORN
You Say YouWant a Revolution

Jobs in 1982

JefRaskins Baby
JefRaskin was the type ofcharacter who could enthrall Steve Jobs—
orannoy him. As it turned out, he did both. A philosophical guy who
could be both playful and ponderous, Raskin had studied computer
science, taught music and visual arts, conducted a chamber opera
company, and organized guerrilla theater. His 1967 doctoral thesis at
U.C. San Diego argued that computers should have graphical rather
than text-based interfaces. When he got fed up with teaching, he
rented a hot air balloon, flew over the chancellor's house, and shouted
down his decision to quit.
108

The Mac Is Born

109

When Jobs was looking for someone to write a manual for the
Apple II in 1976, he called Raskin, who had his own little consult

ing firm. Raskin went to the garage, saw Wozniak beavering away at
a workbench, andwas convinced byJobs to write the manual for $50.

Eventually he became the manager of Apple's publications depart
ment. One of Raskin's dreams was to build an inexpensive computer
for the masses, and in 1979 he convinced Mike Markkula to put him
in charge of a small development project code-named "Annie" to do

just that. Since Raskin thought it was sexist to name computers after
women, he redubbed the project inhonor ofhis favorite type ofapple,
the Mcintosh. But hechanged the spelling inorder nottoconflict with
the name ofthe audio equipment maker Mcintosh Laboratory. The
proposedcomputer became known as the Macintosh.

Raskin envisioned a machine that would sell for $1,000 and be a

simple appliance, with screen and keyboard and computer all in one
unit. To keep the cost down, he proposed a tiny five-inch screen and
a very cheap (and underpowered) microprocessor, theMotorola 6809.

Raskin fancied himself aphilosopher, and he wrote his thoughts in an
ever-expanding notebook that he called "The Book of Macintosh." He

also issued occasional manifestos. One ofthese was called "Computers
by the Millions," and it began with an aspiration: "Ifpersonal com
puters are to be truly personal, it will have to be as likely as not thata
family, pickedat random, willownone."

Throughout 1979 and early 1980 the Macintosh project led atenu
ous existence. Every few months it would almost get killed off, but

each time Raskin managed to cajole Markkula into granting clemency.
It had a research team ofonly four engineers located in the original
Apple office space next to the Good Earth restaurant, a few blocks

from the company's new main building. The work space was filled with
enough toys and radio-controlled model airplanes (Raskinspassion) to
make it look like aday care center for geeks. Every now and then work
would cease for aloosely organized game ofNerfball tag. Andy Hertzfeld recalled, "This inspired everyone to surround their work area with

barricades made out ofcardboard, to provide cover during the game,
makingpart of the office look like a cardboard maze."

The star of the team was a blond, cherubic, and psychologically

110

Walter Isaacson

intense self-taught young engineer named Burrell Smith, who wor

shipped the code work ofWozniak and tried to pull offsimilar dazzling
feats. Atkinson discovered Smith working in Apple's service depart
ment and, amazed at his ability to improvise fixes, recommended him
to Raskin. Smith would later succumb to schizophrenia, but in the

early 1980s he was able to channel his manic intensity into weeklong
binges of engineering brilliance.

Jobs was enthralled by Raskin's vision, but not by his willingness
to make compromises to keep down the cost. At one point in the fall
of 1979 Jobs told him instead to focus on building what he repeat

edly called an "insanely great" product. "Don't worry about price, just
specify the computer's abilities,"Jobs told him. Raskin responded with
a sarcastic memo. It spelled out everything you would want in thepro

posed computer: ahigh-resolution color display, aprinter that worked
without a ribbon and could produce graphics in color at a page per
second, unlimited access to the ARPA net, and the capability to rec

ognize speech and synthesize music, "even simulate Caruso singing
with the Mormon tabernacle choir, with variable reverberation." The

memo concluded, "Starting with the abilities desired is nonsense. We
must start both with a price goal, and a set of abilities, and keep an

eye on today's and the immediate future's technology." Inother words,
Raskin had little patience for Jobs's beliefthat you could distort reality
ifyou had enough passion for your product.

Thus they were destined to clash, especially after Jobs was ejected
from the Lisa project inSeptember 1980 and began casting around for
someplace else to make his mark. Itwas inevitable that his gaze would
fall on the Macintosh project. Raskin's manifestos about an inexpen
sive machine for the masses, with a simple graphic interface andclean

design, stirred his soul. And itwas also inevitable that once Jobs set his
sights on the Macintosh project, Raskin's days were numbered. "Steve
started acting on what he thought we should do, Jefstarted brooding,
and it instantly was clear what the outcome would be," recalled Joanna
Hoffman, a member of the Mac team.
The first conflict was over Raskin's devotion to the underpowered

Motorola 6809 microprocessor. Once again it was a clash between
Raskin's desire to keep the Mac's price under $1,000 and Jobs's deter-

The Mac Is Born

111

mination to build an insanely great machine. So Jobs began pushing
for the Mac to switch to the more powerful Motorola 68000, which
is what the Lisa was using. Just before Christmas 1980, he challenged
Burrell Smith, without telling Raskin, to make a redesigned prototype
that used the more powerful chip. As his hero Wozniak would have

done, Smith threw himself into the task around the clock, working
nonstop for three weeks and employing all sorts ofbreathtaking pro
grammingleaps. When he succeeded, Jobswasable to force the switch
to the Motorola 68000, and Raskin had to brood and recalculate the
cost of the Mac.

There was something larger at stake. The cheaper microprocessor
that Raskin wanted would not have been able to accommodate all of

the gee-whiz graphics—windows, menus, mouse, and so on—that the

team had seen on the Xerox PARC visits. Raskin had convinced every
one to go to Xerox PARC, and he liked the idea ofabitmapped display
and windows, but he was not as charmed by all the cute graphics and
icons, and he absolutely detested the idea ofusing a point-and-click
mouse rather than the keyboard. "Some ofthe people on the project
became enamored ofthe quest to do everything with the mouse," he
later groused. "Another example is the absurd application oficons. An
icon is a symbol equally incomprehensible in all human languages.
There's areason why humans invented phonetic languages."
Raskin's former student Bill Atkinson sided with Jobs. They both
wanted a powerful processor that could support whizzier graphics
and the use ofa mouse. "Steve had to take the project away from Jef,"
Atkinson said. "Jefwas pretty firm and stubborn, and Steve was right
to take it over. The world got a better result."

The disagreements were more than just philosophical; they became
clashes ofpersonality. "I think that he likes people to jump when he
says jump," Raskin once said. "I felt that he was untrustworthy, and
that he does not take kindly to being found wanting. He doesn't seem
to like people who see him without ahalo."Jobs was equally dismissive
of Raskin. "Jef was really pompous," he said. "He didn't know much

about interfaces. So I decided to nab some ofhis people who were
really good, like Atkinson, bring in some ofmy own, take the thing
over and build aless expensive Lisa, not some piece ofjunk."

112

Walter Isaacson

Some on the teamfound Jobs impossible to workwith."Jobs seems

to introduce tension, politics, and hassles rather than enjoying a buffer
from those distractions," one engineer wrote in a memo to Raskin in
December 1980. "I thoroughly enjoy talking with him, and I admire

his ideas, practical perspective, and energy. But I just don't feel thathe
provides the trusting, supportive, relaxed environment that I need."
But many others realized that despite his temperamental failings,
Jobs had the charisma and corporate clout that would lead them to
"make a dent in the universe." Jobs told the staff that Raskin wasjust
a dreamer, whereas he was a doer and would get the Mac done in a

year. It was clear he wanted vindication for having been ousted from
the Lisa group, and he was energized by competition. He publicly bet
John Couch $5,000 that the Mac would ship before the Lisa. "We can
make acomputer that's cheaper and better than the Lisa, and get it out
first," he told the team.

Jobs asserted his control of the group by canceling a brown-bag
lunch seminar that Raskin was scheduled to give to the whole com

pany in February 1981. Raskin happened to go by the room anyway
and discovered that there were a hundred people there waiting to hear

him; Jobs had not bothered tonotify anyone else about his cancellation
order. So Raskin went ahead and gave a talk.
That incident led Raskin to write a blistering memo to Mike Scott,

who once again found himselfinthe difficult position ofbeing apresi
dent trying to manage a company's temperamental cofounder and

major stockholder. It was titled "Working for/with Steve Jobs," and in
it Raskin asserted:

Heis adreadful manager.... I have always liked Steve, butI have found
it impossible to work for him Jobs regularly misses appointments.
This is sowell-known asto be almost a running joke

He acts with

out thinking and with bad judgment.... He does not give credit where
due Very often, when told ofanew idea, he will immediately attack
it and say that it is worthless oreven stupid, and tell you that it was a
waste of time to work on it. This alone is bad management, but if the

idea is a good one he will soon be telling people about it as though it
was his own.

The Mac Is Born

113

That afternoon Scott called in Jobs and Raskin for a showdown in

front of Markkula. Jobs started crying. He and Raskin agreed on only
one thing: Neither could workfor the other one. On the Lisa project,
Scott had sided with Couch. This time he decided it was best to let

Jobs win. After all, the Macwas a minor development project housed
in a distant building that could keep Jobs occupied away from the main
campus. Raskin was told to take a leave of absence. "They wanted to
humorme andgive me something to do, which was fine," Jobsrecalled.
"Itwas like going back to the garage for me. I had my own ragtag team
and I was in control."

Raskin's ouster may nothave seemed fair, butit ended upbeing good
for the Macintosh. Raskin wanted an appliance with little memory, an
anemic processor, a cassette tape, no mouse, and minimal graphics.
Unlike Jobs, he might have been able to keep the price down to close
to $1,000, and that may have helped Apple win market share. But
he could not have pulled off whatJobs did, which was to create and

market a machine that would transform personal computing. In fact
we can see where the road not taken led. Raskin was hired by Canon
to build the machine he wanted. "It was the Canon Cat, and it was a
total flop," Atkinson said. "Nobody wanted it.When Steve turned the

Mac into a compact version ofthe Lisa, it made it into a computing
platform instead of a consumer electronic device."*

Texaco Towers

A few days after Raskin left, Jobs appeared at the cubicle of Andy
Hertzfeld, ayoung engineer ontheApple II team, who had a cherubic
face and impish demeanor similar to his pal Burrell Smith's. Hertz
feld recalled that most of his colleagues were afraid ofJobs "because

of his spontaneous temper tantrums and his proclivity to tell every
one exactly what he thought, which often wasn't very favorable." But
Hertzfeld was excited by him. "Are you any good?" Jobs asked the
moment he walked in. "We only want really good people working on
Raskin died ofpancreatic cancer in2005, not long after Jobs was diagnosed with the disease.

114

Walter Isaacson

the Mac, and I'm not sure you're good enough." Hertzfeld knew how
to answer. "I told him that yes, I thought that I was pretty good."
Jobs left, and Hertzfeldwent backto hiswork. Later that afternoon
he looked up to see Jobs peering over the wall of his cubicle. "I've got

good news for you," he said. "You're working on the Mac team now.
Come with me."

Hertzfeld replied that he needed a couple more days to finish the
Apple II product he was in the middle of. "What's more important
thanworking ontheMacintosh?"Jobs demanded. Hertzfeld explained
that he needed to get his Apple II DOS program in good enough

shape to hand it over to someone. "You're just wasting your time with
that!" Jobs replied. "Who cares about the Apple II? The Apple II will
be dead in a few years. The Macintosh is the future of Apple, and
you're going to start on it now!" With that, Jobs yanked out the power
cord to Hertzfeld's Apple II, causing the code he was working on to
vanish. "Comewith me," Jobs said. "I'm goingto takeyou to your new

desk."Jobs drove Hertzfeld, computer and all, in his silver Mercedes to
the Macintosh offices. "Here's your new desk," he said, plopping him

in a space next to Burrell Smith. "Welcome to the Mac team!" The
desk had been Raskin's. In fact Raskin had left so hastily that some
of the drawers were still filled with his flotsam and jetsam, including
model airplanes.

Jobs's primary test for recruiting people inthe spring of1981 tobe
part ofhis merry band ofpirates was making sure they had a passion
for the product. He would sometimes bring candidates into a room
where a prototype ofthe Mac was covered by a cloth, dramatically un
veil it, andwatch. "Iftheir eyes lit up, if they went right for the mouse

and started pointing and clicking, Steve would smile and hire them,"
recalled Andrea Cunningham. "Hewanted them to say 'Wow!'"
Bruce Horn was one of the programmers at Xerox PARC. When
some ofhis friends, such as LarryTesler, decided tojointheMacintosh

group, Horn considered going there as well. But he got a good offer,
and a $15,000 signing bonus, tojoin another company. Jobs called him
on a Friday night. "You have to come into Apple tomorrow morning,"
he said. "I have a lot of stuffto show you." Horn did, andJobs hooked
him. "Steve was so passionate about building this amazing device that

The Mac Is Born

115

would change the world," Horn recalled. "By sheer force of his per
sonality, he changed my mind." Jobs showed Horn exacdy how the
plastic would be molded and would fit together at perfect angles, and
how good the board was going to look inside. "He wanted me to see
that thiswhole thingwas going to happen andit was thoughtout from
end to end. Wow, I said, I don't see that kind of passion every day. So
I signed up."
Jobs even tried to reengage Wozniak. "I resented the fact that he
had not been doing much, but then I thought, hell, I wouldn't be here
without his brilliance," Jobs later told me. But as soon as Jobs was
starting to get him interested in the Mac, Wozniak crashed his new

single-engine Beechcraft while attempting a takeoff near Santa Cruz.
He barely survived and ended up with partial amnesia. Jobs spent time
at the hospital, but when Wozniak recovered he decided it was time

to take a break from Apple. Ten years after dropping out of Berkeley,
he decided toreturn there tofinally get his degree, enrolling under the
name of Rocky Raccoon Clark.
In order to make the project his own, Jobs decided it should no

longer be code-named after Raskin's favorite apple. In various inter
views, Jobs had been referring to computers as a bicycle for the mind;
the ability of humans to create a bicycle allowed them to move more
efficiently than even a condor, and likewise the ability to create com
puters would multiply the efficiency of their minds. So one day Jobs
decreed that henceforth the Macintosh should be known instead as

the Bicycle. This did not go over well. "Burrell and I thought this
was the silliest thing we ever heard, and we simply refused to use the
new name," recalled Hertzfeld. Within a month the idea was dropped.
By early 1981 the Mac team had grown to about twenty, and Jobs
decided that they should have bigger quarters. So he moved' every
one to the second floor ofa brown-shingled, two-story building about
three blocks from Apple's main offices. It was nextto a Texaco station
and thus became known as Texaco Towers. In order to make the office

more lively, he told the team to buy a stereo system. "Burrell andI ran
outand bought a silver, cassette-based boom box right away, before he
could change his mind," recalled Hertzfeld.

Jobs's triumph was soon complete. A few weeks after winning his

116

Walter Isaacson

power struggle with Raskin to run the Mac division, he helped push
out Mike Scott asApple's president. Scottyhad become more and more
erratic, alternately bullying and nurturing. He finally lost most of his
support among the employees when he surprised them by imposinga
roundoflayoffs that he handled withatypical ruthlessness. In addition,
he had begunto suffer a variety of afflictions, ranging from eye infec
tions to narcolepsy. When Scottwas on vacation in Hawaii, Markkula
called together the top managers to askif he should be replaced. Most
of them, including Jobs andJohn Couch, said yes. So Markkula took
over as an interimand ratherpassive president, andJobs found that he
now had full rein to do what he wanted with the Mac division.

CHAPTER

ELEVEN

THE REALITY

DISTORTION FIELD
Playing by His Own Set of Rules

The originalMac team in 1984: George CroWyJoanna Hoffman, Burrell
Smithy Andy Hertzfeld, BillAtkinson, andJerry Manock

When Andy Hertzfeld joined the Macintosh team, he got a briefing
from Bud Tribble, the other software designer, about the huge amount
ofwork that still needed tobe done. Jobs wanted it finished byJanuary
1982, less than a year away. "That's crazy," Hertzfeld said. "There's no

way." Tribble said that Jobs would not accept any contrary facts. "The
best way to describe the situation is a term from Star Trek," Tribble
explained. "Steve has a reality distortion field." When Hertzfeld looked
puzzled, Tribble elaborated. "In his presence, reality is malleable. He

117

118

Walter Isaacson

canconvince anyone ofpractically anything. It wears offwhenhe's not
around, but it makes it hard to have realistic schedules."

Tribble recalled that he adopted the phrase from the "Menagerie"

episodes of Star Trek, "in which the aliens create their own new world
through sheer mental force." He meant thephrase to be a compliment
aswell as a caution: "It was dangerous to get caught in Steve's distor
tion field, but it was whatled him to actually be able to change reality."
At first Hertzfeld thought thatTribble was exaggerating, but after
two weeks ofworking withJobs, hebecame a keen observer ofthe phe
nomenon. "The reality distortion field was a confounding melange of
a charismatic rhetorical style, indomitable will, and eagerness to bend
any fact to fit the purpose at hand," he said.
Therewas litde that could shield you from the force, Hertzfeld dis
covered. "Amazingly, the reality distortion field seemed to be effective

even if you were acutely aware ofit.We would often discuss potential
techniques for grounding it, but after a while most of us gave up, ac
cepting it as a force ofnature." After Jobs decreed thatthesodas in the
office refrigerator be replaced by Odwalla organic orange and carrot
juices, someone on the team had T-shirts made. "Reality Distortion
Field," they said on thefront, and ontheback, "It's in thejuice!"
To some people, calling it a reality distortion field was just a clever
way to say thatJobs tended to lie. But it was in fact a more complex
form of dissembling. He would assert something—be it a fact about
world history or a recounting ofwho suggested anidea at a meeting—
without even considering the truth. It came from willfully defying re
ality, not only to others but to himself. "He can deceive himself," said
Bill Atkinson. "It allowed him to con people into believing his vision,
because he has personally embraced andinternalized it."
A lot of people distort reality, of course. WhenJobs did so, it was
often a tactic foraccomplishing something. Wozniak, who was as con-

genitally honest as Jobs was tactical, marveled at how effective it could
be. "His reality distortion is when he has an illogical vision of the fix
ture, such as telling me that I could design the Breakout game in just
a few days. You realize that it can't be true, but he somehow makes it
true."

When members of the Mac teamgot ensnared in his reality distor-

TheReality Distortion Field

119

tion field, they were almost hypnotized. "He reminded me of Raspu
tin," said Debi Coleman. "He laser-beamed in on you and didn't blink.
It didn't matter if he was serving purple Kool-Aid. You drank it." But
like Wozniak, she believed that the reality distortion field was em
powering: It enabled Jobs to inspire his team to change the course of
computer history with a fraction of the resources ofXerox or IBM. "It

was a self-fulfilling distortion," she claimed. "You did the impossible,
because you didn't realize it was impossible."
At the root of the reality distortion was Jobs's beliefthat the rules
didn't apply to him. He had some evidence for this; in his childhood,
he had often been able to bend reality to his desires. Rebelliousness
and willfulness were ingrained in his character. He had the sense that

he was special, a chosen one, an enlightened one. "He thinks there are
a few people who are special—people like Einstein and Gandhi and
the gurus he met in India—and he's one of them," said Hertzfeld. "He

told Chrisann this. Once he even hinted to me that he was enlight
ened. It's almostlike Nietzsche." Jobs never studied Nietzsche, but the

philosopher's concept of the will to power and the special nature of

the Uberrima came naturally to him. As Nietzsche wrote in Thus Spoke
Zarathustra, "The spirit now wills his own will, and he who had been

lost to the world now conquers the world." If reality did not comport
with his will, he would ignore it, as he had done with the birth of his

daughter and would do years later, when first diagnosed with cancer.
Even in small everyday rebellions, such as not putting a license plate
on his carandparking it in handicapped spaces, he acted as if he were
not subject to the strictures around him.

Another key aspect ofJobs's worldview was his binary way ofcate
gorizing things. People were either "enlightened" or"an asshole." Their
work was either "the best" or "totally shitty." Bill Atkinson, the Mac
designer who fell on the good side of these dichotomies, described
what it was like:

It was difficult working under Steve, because there was a great polarity
between gods and shitheads. Ifyou were agod, you were up ona pedes
taland could donowrong. Those ofus who were considered to begods,
as I was, knew thatwe were actually mortal and made bad engineering

120

Walter Isaacson

decisions and farted like any person, so we were always afraid that we
wouldget knocked offour pedestal. The ones whowere shitheads, who
were brilliant engineers working very hard, felt there was no way they
couldget appreciated and rise above their status.

But these categories were not immutable, for Jobs could rapidly
reverse himself. When briefing Hertzfeld about the reality distortion
field, Tribble specifically warned himaboutJobs's tendency to resemble
high-voltage alternating current. "Just because he tells you that some
thing is awful or great, it doesn't necessarily mean he'll feel that way
tomorrow," Tribble explained. "If you tell him a newidea, he'll usually
tell you that he thinks it's stupid. But then, if he actually likes it, ex

actly one week later, he'll come back to yo\i and propose your idea to
you, as if he thought of it."
The audacity of this pirouette technique would have dazzled Dia-

ghilev. "If one line of argument failed to persuade, he would deftly
switch to another," Hertzfeld said. "Sometimes, he would throw you

off balance by suddenly adopting your position as his own, without
acknowledging that he ever thought differently." That happened re
peatedly to Bruce Horn, the programmer who, with Tesler, had been
lured from Xerox PARC. "One week I'd tell him about an idea that I

had, and he would say it was crazy," recalled Horn. "The next week,
he'd come and say, 'Hey I have this great idea'—and it would be my
idea! You'd call him on it and say, 'Steve, I told you that a week ago,'
andhe'd say, 'Yeah, yeah, yeah' andjustmove rightalong."
It was as if Jobs's brain circuits were missing a device that would
modulate the extreme spikes of impulsive opinions that popped into
his mind. So in dealing with him, the Mac team adopted an audio
concept called a "low pass filter." In processing his input, they learned
to reduce the amplitude of his high-frequency signals. That served to
smooth out the data set and provide a less jittery moving average of
his evolving attitudes. "After a few cycles of him taking alternating
extreme positions," said Hertzfeld, "we would learn to low pass filter
his signals and not reactto the extremes."
WasJobs's unfiltered behavior caused by a lack of emotional sen
sitivity? No. Almost the opposite. He was very emotionally attuned,

The Reality Distortion Field

121

able to read people and know their psychological strengths and vul
nerabilities. He could stun an unsuspecting victim with an emotional
towel-snap, perfecdy aimed. He intuitively knew when someone was
faking it or truly knew something. This made him masterful at cajol
ing, stroking, persuading, flattering, and intimidating people. "He had
the uncanny capacity to know exactly what your weak point is, know
what will make you feel small, to make you cringe," Joanna Hoffman
said. "It's a commontrait in people who arecharismatic and knowhow
to manipulate people. Knowing that he can crush you makes you feel
weakened and eager for his approval, so then he can elevate you and
put you on a pedestaland own you."
Ann Bowers became an expert at dealing withJobs's perfectionism,
petulance, and prickliness. She had been the human resources direc
tor at Intel, but had stepped aside after she married its cofounderBob

Noyce. She joined Apple in 1980 and served as a calming mother fig
ure who would step in after one ofJobs's tantrums. She would go to
his office, shut the door, and gendy lecture him. "I know, I know," he
would say. "Well, then, please stop doing it," shewould insist. Bowers
recalled, "He would be good for a while, and then a week or so later

I would get a call again." She realized that he could barely contain
himself. "He had these huge expectations, and if people didn't deliver,
he couldn't stand it. He couldn't control himself. I could understand

why Steve would get upset, andhewas usually right, but it had a hurt
ful effect. It created a fear factor. He was self-aware, but that didn't
always modifyhis behavior."

Jobs became close to Bowers and her husband, and he would drop
in at their Los Gatos Hills home unannounced. She would hear his

motorcycle in the distance and say, "I guess we have Steve for dinner

again." For a while she and Noyce were like a surrogate family. "He
was sobright andalso soneedy. He needed a grown-up, a father figure,
which Bob became, and I became like a mother figure."
There were some upsides toJobs's demanding and wounding be
havior. People who were not crushed ended up being stronger. They
did better work, out of both fear and an eagerness to please. "His
behavior can be emotionally draining, but if you survive, it works,"
Hoffman said. You could also push back—sometimes—and not only

122

Walter Isaacson

survive but thrive. That didn't always work; Raskin tried it, succeeded
for a while, and then was destroyed. But if you were calmly confident,
if Jobs sizedyou up and decided that you knew what you were doing,
he would respect you. In both his personal and his professional life
over the years, his inner circle tended to include many more strong
people than toadies.
The Mac team knew that. Every year, beginning in 1981, it gave
out an award to the person who did the best job of standing up to
him.The award was pardy a joke, but also partlyreal, and Jobs knew
about it and liked it.Joanna Hoffman won the firstyear. From an East
ern European refugee family, she had a strong temper and will. One
day, for example, she discovered that Jobs had changed her marketing

projections in a way she found totally reality-distorting. Furious, she
marched to his office. "As I'm climbing the stairs, I told his assistant

I am going to take a knife and stab it into his heart," she recounted.
Al Eisenstat, the corporate counsel, came running out to restrain her.
"But Steve heard me out and backed down."

Hoffmanwon the award again in 1982. "I remember beingenvious
ofJoanna, because she would stand up to Steve and I didn't have the
nerve yet," said Debi Coleman, who joined the Mac team that year.
"Then,in 1983,1 got the award. I hadlearned you had to standup for
what you believe, which Steve respected. I started getting promoted by
him afterthat."Eventually sherose to become head of manufacturing.
One day Jobs barged into the cubicle of one of Atkinson's engi
neers and uttered his usual "This is shit." As Atkinson recalled, "The

guy said, 'No it's not, it's actually the best way,' and he explained to
Steve the engineering trade-offs he'd made." Jobs backed down. At
kinson taught his team to putJobs's words through a translator. "We
learned to interpret 'This is shit' to actually be a question that means,
'Tell me why this is the best way to do it.'" But the story had a coda,
which Atkinson also found instructive. Eventually the engineer found

an even better way to perform the function that Jobs had criticized.
"He did it better because Steve had challenged him," said Atkinson,

"which shows you can push back onhim but should also listen, for he's
usuallyright."

Jobs's prickly behavior was partly driven by his perfectionism and

TheReality Distortion Field

123

his impatience with those who made compromises in order to get a
product out on time and on budget. "He could not make trade-offs
well," said Atkinson. "If someone didn't care to make their product
perfect, they were a bozo." At theWest Coast Computer Faire in April
1981, for example, Adam Osborne released thefirst truly portable per
sonal computer. It was not great—it had a five-inch screen and not

much memory—but it worked well enough. As Osborne famously
declared, "Adequacy is sufficient. All else is superfluous." Jobs found
that approach to be morally appalling, and he spent days making fun
of Osborne. "This guy just doesn't get it," Jobs repeatedly railed as he
wandered the Apple corridors. "He's not making art,he's making shit."
One day Jobs came into the cubicle of Larry Kenyon, an engineer
who was working on theMacintosh operating system, andcomplained
that it was taking too long to boot up. Kenyon started to explain, but
Jobs cut him off. "If it could save a person's life, would you find a way
to shave ten seconds offthe boottime?" he asked. Kenyon allowed that
he probably could. Jobs went to a whiteboard and showed that if there
were five million people usingthe Mac, and it took ten seconds extrato
turn it on everyday, that addedup to three hundred millionor so hours
per year that people would save, which was the equivalent of at least

one hundred lifetimes saved per year. "Larry was suitably impressed,
and a few weeks later he came back and it booted up twenty-eight
seconds faster," Atkinson recalled. "Steve had a way of motivating by
looking at the bigger picture."

The result was that the Macintosh team came to share Jobs's pas
sion for making agreat product, notjustaprofitable one. "Jobs thought
of himself as an artist, and he encouraged the design team to think of
ourselves that way too," said Hertzfeld. "The goal was never to beat
the competition, or to make a lot of money. It was to do the greatest
thing possible, or even a little greater." He once took the team to see

an exhibit ofTiffany glass at the Metropolitan Museum in Manhattan
because he beHeved they could learn from Louis Tiffany's example of
creating great art that couldbe mass-produced. Recalled Bud Tribble,
"We said to ourselves, 'Hey, ifwe're going to make things in ourlives,
we might as well make them beautiful.'"

Was all ofhis stormy and abusive behavior necessary? Probably not,

124

Walter Isaacson

nor was it justified. Therewere otherways to have motivated his team.
Even though the Macintosh would turn out to be great, it was way
behind schedule and way over budget because ofJobs's impetuous in
terventions.There was also a cost in brutalized human feelings, which
caused much of the team to burn out. "Steve's contributions could

have been madewithout so many stories about him terrorizing folks,"
Wozniaksaid. "I likebeing more patient and not havingso manycon
flicts. I think a company canbe a goodfamily. Ifthe Macintosh project
had been run my way, things probably would have been a mess. But
I think if it had been a mixof both our styles, it would havebeen better
than just the waySteve did it."
But even though Jobs's style could be demoralizing, it could also
be oddly inspiring. It infused Apple employees with an abiding pas
sion to create groundbreaking products and a belief that they could
accomplish whatseemed impossible. TheyhadT-shirts made that read
"90 hours a week and loving it!" Out of a fear of Jobs mixed with an
incredibly strong urge to impress him, they exceeded their own ex
pectations. "I've learned over the years that whenyouhave really good
people you don't have to baby them," Jobs later explained. "Byexpect
ing them to do great things, you can get them to do great things. The
original Mac teamtaught me that A-plusplayers liketo worktogether,
and they don't like it if you tolerate B work. Ask any member of that
Mac team.They will tell you it was worth the pain."
Most of them agree. "He would shout at a meeting, 'You asshole,
you never do anything right,'" Debi Coleman recalled. "It was like an
hourly occurrence. Yet I consider myself the absolute luckiest person
in the world to have worked with him."

CHAPTER

TWELVE

THE DESIGN
Real Artists Simplify

A BauhausAesthetic

Unlike most kids who grew up inEichler homes, Jobs knew what they
were and why they were so wonderful. He liked the notion of simple
and clean modernism produced for the masses. Healso loved listening
to his father describe the styling intricacies of various cars. So from

the beginning at Apple, he beHeved that great industrial design—
a colorfully simple logo, a sleek case for the Apple II—would set the
company apart and make its products distinctive.

The company's first office, after it moved out ofhis family garage,
was in a small building it shared with a Sony sales office. Sony was
famous for its signature style and memorable product designs, so Jobs
would drop by to study the marketing material. "He would come in

looking scruffy and fondle the product brochures and point out de
sign features," said Dan'l Lewin, who worked there. "Every now and
then, hewould ask, 'Can I take this brochure?'" By 1980, hehad hired
Lewin.

His fondness for the dark, industrial look of Sony receded around

June 1981, when he began attending the annual International Design
Conference in Aspen. The meeting that year focused on Italian style,
125

126

Walter Isaacson

and it featured the architect-designer Mario Bellini, the filmmaker
Bernardo Bertolucci, the car maker Sergio Pininfarina, and the Fiat
heiress and politician Susanna Agnelli. "I had come to revere the Ital
ian designers, just like the kid in Breaking-Away reveres the Italian
bikers," recalled Jobs,"so it was an amazing inspiration."
In Aspen he was exposed to the spare and functional design phi
losophy of the Bauhaus movement, which was enshrined by Herbert

Bayer in the buildings, living suites, sans serif font typography, and
furniture on the Aspen Institute campus. Like his mentors Walter
Gropius and Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Bayer believed that there
should be no distinction between fine art and applied industrial de

sign. The modernist International Style championed by the Bauhaus
taught that design should be simple, yet have an expressive spirit. It
emphasized rationality and functionality by employing clean lines and
forms. Among the maxims preached byMies and Gropius were "God
is in the details" and "Less is more." As with Eichler homes, the artistic

sensibility was combined with the capability for mass production.
Jobs publicly discussed his embrace of the Bauhaus style in a talk
he gave at the 1983 design conference, the theme ofwhich was "The
Future Isn'tWhat It Used to Be." He predicted the passing ofthe Sony
style in favor of Bauhaus simplicity. "The current wave of industrial
design is Sony's high-tech look, which is gunmetal gray, maybe paint
it black, do weird stuff to it," he said. "It's easy to do that. But it's not

great." He proposed an alternative, born oftheBauhaus, thatwas more
true to the function and nature of the products. "What we're goingto

do is make the products high-tech, and we're going to package them
cleanly so thatyou know they're high-tech. We will fit them in a small
package, and then we can make them beautiful and white, just like
Braun does with its electronics."

He repeatedly emphasized that Apple's products would be clean
and simple. "We will make them bright and pure and honest about
being high-tech, rather than a heavy industrial look of black, black,
black, black, like Sony," he preached. "So that's our approach. Very
simple, and we're really shooting for Museum ofModern Art quality.
The way we're running the company, the product design, the advertis
ing, it all comes down to this: Let's make it simple. Really simple."

The Design

127

Apple's design mantra would remain the one featured on its first bro
chure: "Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication."

Jobs felt that design simplicity should belinked to making products
easy to use. Those goals do not always gotogether. Sometimes a design
can be so sleek and simple that a user finds it intimidating or un
friendly to navigate. "The main thingin our design is that we have to
make things intuitively obvious,"Jobs told the crowd ofdesign mavens.
Forexample, he extolled the desktop metaphor he was creating for the
Macintosh. "People know how to deal with a desktop intuitively. If you
walk into an office, there are papers on the desk. The one on the top
is the most important. People know how to switch priority. Part of the
reason we model our computers on metaphors like the desktop is that
we canleverage this experience people already have."
Speaking at the same time as Jobs that Wednesday afternoon, but
in a smaller seminar room, was Maya Lin, twenty-three, who hadbeen
catapulted into fame the previous November when her Vietnam Vet
erans Memorial was dedicated inWashington, D.C. They struck up a
close friendship, and Jobs invited her to visit Apple. "I came to work
with Steve for aweek," Linrecalled. "I asked him, 'Whydo computers

look like clunky TV sets? Why don't you make something thin? Why
nota flat laptop?' "Jobs replied thatthis was indeed his goal, as soon as
the technology was ready.

At that time there was not much exciting happening in the realm
ofindustrial design, Jobs felt. Hehad a Richard Sapper lamp, which he
admired, and healso liked thefurniture ofCharles and Ray Eames and
the Braun products of Dieter Rams. But there were no towering fig
ures energizing the world of industrial design the way that Raymond
Loewy and Herbert Bayer had done. "There really wasn't much going
on in industrial design, particularly in Silicon Valley, and Steve was
very eager to change that," said Lin. "Hisdesign sensibility is sleek but
not slick, and it's playful. He embraced minimalism, which came from

his Zen devotion to simplicity, but he avoided allowing that to make
his products cold. They stayed fun. He's passionate and super-serious
about design, but at the same time there's a sense ofplay."
As Jobs's design sensibilities evolved, he became particularly at
tracted to theJapanese style andbegan hanging outwithits stars, such

128

Walter Isaacson

as Issey Miyake and I. M. Pei. His Buddhist training was a big influ
ence. "I have always found Buddhism, Japanese Zen Buddhism in par
ticular, to be aesthetically sublime," he said. "The most sublime thing
I've ever seenarethe gardens around Kyoto. I'm deeply moved bywhat
that culture has produced, andit's direcdy from Zen Buddhism."

Like a Porsche

Jef Raskin's vision for the Macintosh was that it would be like a boxy

carry-on suitcase, which would be closed byflipping up the keyboard
over the front screen. When Jobs took over the project, he decided to

sacrifice portability for a distinctive design thatwouldn't take up much
space on a desk. He plopped down a phone book and declared, to the
horror of the engineers, that it shouldn't have a footprint larger than
that. So his design team of Jerry Manock and Terry Oyama began
working on ideas that had the screen above the computer box, with a
keyboard that was detachable.

One day in March 1981, Andy Hertzfeld came back to the of
fice from dinner to find Jobs hovering over their one Mac prototype
in intense discussion with the creative services director, James Ferris.

"We need it to have a classic look that won't go out of style, like the

Volkswagen Beetle," Jobs said. From his father he had developed an
appreciation for the contours of classic cars.
"No, that's not right," Ferris replied. "The lines should be volup
tuous, like a Ferrari."

"Not a Ferrari, that's not right either," Jobs countered. "It should
be more likea Porsche!" Jobs owned a Porsche 928 at the time. When
Bill Atkinson was over one weekend, Jobs brought him outside to
admire the car. "Great art stretches the taste, it doesn't follow tastes,"
he told Atkinson. He also admired the design of the Mercedes. "Over

the years, they've made the lines softer butthe details starker," he said
one day as hewalked around the parking lot. "That's what we have to
do with the Macintosh."

Oyama drafted apreliminary design and had aplaster model made.
The Mac team gathered around for the unveiling and expressed their

TheDesign

129

thoughts. Hertzfeld calledit "cute." Others also seemed satisfied. Then

Jobs let loose a blistering burst of criticism. "It's way too boxy, it's got
to be more curvaceous. The radius of the first chamfer needs to be

bigger, andI don't like the size of the bevel." With his new fluency in
industrial design lingo,Jobs was referring to the angular orcurved edge
connecting the sides of the computer. But then he gave a resounding
compliment. "It's a start," he said.

Every month or so, Manock andOyama would present a new itera
tion based onJobs's previous criticisms. Thelatest plaster model would
be dramatically unveiled, and all the previous attempts would belined
up next to it. That not only helped them gauge the design's evolu

tion, but it prevented Jobs from insisting that one of his suggestions
had been ignored. "By the fourth model, I could barely distinguish it
from the third one," said Hertzfeld, "but Steve was always critical and
decisive, saying he loved orhated a detail that I could barely perceive."
One weekend Jobs went to Macy's in Palo Alto and again spent
time studying appliances, especially the Cuisinart. He came bound

ing into the Mac office that Monday, asked the design team to go buy
one, andmade a raftof new suggestions based on its lines, curves, and
bevels.

Jobs kept insisting that the machine should look friendly. As a
result, it evolved to resemble a human face. With the disk drive built
in below the screen, the unit was taller and narrower than most com

puters, suggesting a head. The recess near the base evoked a gende
chin, and Jobs narrowed the strip ofplastic atthe top so that it avoided
the Neanderthal forehead that made the Lisa subtly unattractive.
The patent for thedesign ofthe Apple case was issued in the name of
Steve Jobs as well as Manock and Oyama. "Even though Steve didn't

draw any ofthe lines, his ideas and inspiration made the design what it
is," Oyama later said."To be honest,we didn't know what it meant for
a computer to be 'friendly'until Steve told us."

Jobs obsessed with equal intensity about the look of what would
appear on the screen. One dayBillAtkinson burst into Texaco Towers

all excited. He had just come up with a brilliant algorithm that could
draw circles and ovals onscreen quickly. The math for making circles
usually required calculating square roots, which the 68000 micropro-

130

Walter Isaacson

cessor didn't support. But Atkinson did a workaround based on the
factthat the sum of a sequence of odd numbers produces a sequence of
perfect squares (for example, 1 +3 =4,1 +3 +5 =9,etc.). Hertzfeld re
called that when Atkinson fired up his demo, everyone was impressed
except Jobs. "Well, circles andovals are good," he said, "but howabout
drawing rectangles with rounded corners?"
"I don'tthink we really need it,"said Atkinson, who explained that
it would be almost impossible to do. "I wanted to keep the graphics
routines lean and limit them to the primitives that truly needed to be
done," he recalled.

"Rectangles withrounded corners are everywhere!"Jobs said, jump
ing up and getting more intense. "Just look around this room!" He

pointed out the whiteboard and the tabletop and other objects that
were rectangular with rounded corners. "And look outside, there's even
more, practically everywhere you look!" Hedragged Atkinson out for a
walk, pointing out car windows and billboards and street signs. "Within
threeblocks, wefound seventeen examples," saidJobs. "I startedpoint

ing them out everywhere until he was completely convinced."
"When he finally got to a No Parking sign, I said, 'Okay, you're
right, I give up. We need to have a rounded-corner rectangle as a
primitive!'" Hertzfeld recalled, "Bill returned to Texaco Towers the
following afternoon, with a big smile on his face. His demo was now
drawing rectangles with beautifully rounded corners blisteringly fast."
The dialogue boxes and windows on the Lisa and the Mac, and al
most every other subsequent computer, ended up being rendered with
rounded corners.

At the calligraphy class hehad audited at Reed, Jobs learned tolove
typefaces, with all oftheir serif and sans serif variations, proportional
spacing, and leading. "When we were designing the first Macintosh
computer, it all came back to me," he later said of that class. Because
the Mac was bitmapped, it was possible to devise an endless array of
fonts, ranging from the elegant tothe wacky, and render them pixel by
pixelon the screen.

To design these fonts, Hertzfeld recruited a high school friend
from suburban Philadelphia, Susan Kare. They named the fonts after

the stops on Philadelphia's Main Line commuter train: Overbrook,

TheDesign

131

Merion, Ardmore, and Rosemont. Jobs found the process fascinating.
Late one afternoon he stopped byand started brooding about the font
names. They were "litde cities that nobody's ever heard of," he com
plained. "They ought to be world-class cities!" The fonts were renamed
Chicago, New York, Geneva, London, San Francisco, Toronto, and
Venice.

Markkula and some others could never quite appreciate Jobs's ob
session with typography. "His knowledge of fonts was remarkable, and
hekept insisting onhaving great ones," Markkula recalled. "I kept say
ing, 'Fonts?!? Don't we have more important things to do?'" In fact
the delightful assortment of Macintosh fonts, when combined with

laser-writer printing and great graphics capabilities, would help launch
the desktop publishing industry and bea boon for Apple's bottom line.
It also introduced all sorts of regular folks, ranging from high school
journalists to moms who edited PTA newsletters, to the quirky joyof
knowing about fonts, which was once reserved for printers, grizzled
editors, and other ink-stained wretches.

Kare also developed the icons, such as the trash can for discarding
files, that helped define graphical interfaces. She and Jobs hit it off
because they shared an instinct for simplicity along with a desire to
make theMac whimsical. "He usually came in at the end ofevery day,"
she said. "He'd always want to know what was new, and he's always
had good taste and a goodsense forvisual details." Sometimes he came

in on Sunday morning, so Kare made it a point to be there working.
Every now and then, she would run into a problem. He rejected one
of herrenderings of a rabbit, an icon for speeding up the mouse-click
rate, saying that the furry creature looked "too gay."
Jobs lavished similar attention on the title bars atop windows and

documents. He had Atkinson and Kare do them over and over again
as he agonized over their look. He did not like the ones on the Lisa
because they were too black and harsh. He wanted the ones on the

Mac to besmoother, to have pinstripes. "We must have gone through
twenty different tide bar designs before he was happy," Atkinson re
called. Atone point Kare and Atkinson complained thathewas making
them spend too much time on tinylitde tweaks to the tide bar when

they had bigger things to do. Jobs erupted. "Can you imagine looking

132

Walter Isaacson

at that every day?" he shouted. "It'snotjust a litde thing,it's something
we have to do right."

Chris Espinosa found one way to satisfyJobs's design demands and
control-freak tendencies. One of Wozniak's youthful acolytes from
the days in the garage, Espinosa had been convinced to drop out of
Berkeley byJobs, who argued that he would always have a chance to
study, but only one chance to work on the Mac. On his own, he de
cided to design a calculator forthe computer. "Weallgathered around
as Chris showed the calculator to Steve and then held his breath, wait

ing for Steve's reaction," Hertzfeld recalled.
"Well,it's a start,"Jobssaid, "butbasically, it stinks. The background
coloris too dark, some lines are the wrong thickness, and the buttons
are too big." Espinosa kept refining it in response to Jobs's critiques,
day after day, but with each iteration came new criticisms. So finally
one afternoon, whenJobs came by, Espinosa unveiled his inspired so
lution: "The SteveJobs RollYour Own Calculator Construction Set."
It allowed the user to tweak and personalize the look of the calcula
tor by changing the thickness of the lines, the size of the buttons, the
shading, the background, andotherattributes. Instead ofjustlaughing,
Jobs plunged in and started to play around with the look to suit his
tastes. After about ten minutes he got it the way he liked. His design,
not surprisingly, was the one that shipped on the Mac and remained
the standard for fifteenyears.

Although his focus was on the Macintosh, Jobs wanted to cre
ate a consistent design language for all Apple products. So he set up
a contest to choose a world-class designer who would be for Apple
what Dieter Rams was for Braun. The project was code-named Snow
White, not because of his preference for the color but because the
products to be designed were code-named after the seven dwarfs. The
winner was Hartmut Esslinger, a German designer who was respon
sible for the lookof Sony's Trinitron televisions. Jobs flew to the Black
Forest region of Bavaria to meet him andwas impressed not only with
Esslinger's passion but also his spirited way of driving hisMercedes at
more than one hundred miles per hour.

Even though hewas German, Esslinger proposed that there should
be a "born-in-America gene for Apple's DNA" that would produce a

The Design

133

"California global" look, inspired by "Hollywood and music, a bit of
rebellion, and natural sex appeal." His guiding principle was "Form
follows emotion," a playon the familiar maxim that form follows func
tion. He produced forty models of products to demonstrate the con
cept, and when Jobs saw them he proclaimed, "Yes, this is it!" The
Snow White look, which was adopted immediately for the Apple lie,

featured white cases, tight rounded curves, and lines of thin grooves
for both ventilation and decoration. Jobs offered Esslinger a contract
on the condition that he move to California. They shook hands and,
in EssUnger's not-so-modest words, "that handshake launched one of

the most decisive collaborations in the history of industrial design."
Esslinger's firm, frogdesign,* opened in Palo Alto in mid-1983 with
a $1.2 million annual contract to work for Apple, and from then on

every Apple product has included the proud declaration "Designed in
California."

From his father Jobs had learned that a hallmark of passionate
craftsmanship is making sure that even the aspects that will remain
hidden are done beautifully. One ofthe most extreme—and telling—
implementations of that philosophy came when he scrutinized the

printed circuit board that would hold the chips and other components
deep inside the Macintosh. No consumer would ever see it, butJobs
began critiquing it on aesthetic grounds. "That part's really pretty," he
said. "But look at thememory chips. That's ugly. Thelines are too close
together."

One of the new engineers interrupted and asked why it mattered.
"The only thing that's important is how well itworks. Nobody is going
to see the PC board."

Jobs reacted typically. "Iwant it to be as beautiful as possible, even
if it's inside the box. A great carpenter isn't going to use lousy wood
for the back ofa cabinet, even though nobody's going to see it." In an
* The firm changed itsname from frogdesign to frog design in2000 and moved to San Francisco.

Esslinger picked the original name not merely because frogs have the ability to metamorphose, but
as asalute to itsroots in the(f)ederal (Republic (o)f(g)ermany. He said that "the lowercase letters

offered anod to the Bauhaus notion ofanon-hierarchical language, reinforcing the company's ethos
of democratic partnership."

134

Walter Isaacson

interview a few years later, after the Macintosh came out,Jobs again
reiterated that lesson from his father: "When you're a carpenter mak

ing a beautiful chest of drawers, you're not going to use a piece of
plywood on the back, even though it faces the wall and nobody will
ever see it.You'll know it'sthere, soyou're going to usea beautiful piece
of wood on the back. Foryou to sleep well at night, the aesthetic, the

quality, has to be carried all theway through."
From Mike Markkula he had learned the importance of packaging

and presentation. People do judge abook by its cover, so for the box of
the Macintosh, Jobs chose a full-color design and kept trying to make

it look better. "He got the guys to redo it fifty times," recalled Alain
Rossmann, a member of the Mac teamwho married JoannaHoffman.

"Itwas going tobe thrown inthe trash as soon as the consumer opened
it,but hewas obsessed byhow it looked." To Rossmann, this showed a
lack ofbalance; money was being spent on expensive packaging while
they were trying to save money on the memory chips. But for Jobs,
each detailwas essential to making the Macintosh amazing.

When the design was finally locked in, Jobs called the Macintosh
team together for a ceremony. "Real artists sign their work," he said.
So he got out a sheet ofdrafting paper and a Sharpie pen and had all
of them sign their names. The signatures were engraved inside each
Macintosh. No one would ever see them, but the members of the team

knew that their signatures were inside, justas they knew that the cir
cuit board was laid out as elegantly as possible. Jobs called them each

up by name, one at a time. Burrell Smith went first. Jobs waited until
last, after all forty-five of the others. He found a place right in the
center of the sheet and signed his name in lowercase letters with a
grand flair. Then he toasted them with champagne. "With moments
like this, he gotus seeing our work as art," said Atkinson.

CHAPTER

THIRTEEN

BUILDING THE MAC
The Journey Is the Reward

Competition

When IBM introduced its personal computer in August 1981, Jobs
had his team buyone and dissect it.Their consensus was that it sucked.

Chris Espinosa called it "a half-assed, hackneyed attempt," and there
was some truth to that. It used old-fashioned command-line prompts
and didn't support bitmapped graphical displays. Apple became cocky,
not realizing that corporate technology managers might feel more
comfortable buying from anestablished company like IBM rather than
one named after a piece of fruit. Bill Gates happened to be visiting
Apple headquarters for a meeting on the day the IBM PC was an
nounced. "They didn't seem to care," he said. "It took them a year to
realize what had happened."

Reflecting its cheeky confidence, Apple took out a full-page ad in
the Wall StreetJournal with the headline "Welcome, IBM. Seriously."
It cleverly positioned the upcoming computer batde as a two-way
contest between the spunky and rebellious Apple and the establish
ment Goliath IBM, conveniendy relegating to irrelevance companies
such as Commodore, Tandy, and Osborne that were doing just as well
as Apple.
135

136

Walter Isaacson

Throughout his career, Jobs liked to see himself as an enlightened
rebel pitted against evil empires, a Jedi warrior or Buddhist samurai
fighting the forces of darkness. IBM was his perfect foil. He cleverly
cast the upcoming battle not as a mere business competition, but as a
spiritual struggle. "If, for some reason, we make some giant mistakes
and IBMwins, my personal feeling isthatwe are going to enter sort of
a computer Dark Ages for about twenty years," he told aninterviewer.
"Once IBM gains control of a market sector, they almost always stop
innovation." Even thirtyyears later, reflecting backon the competition,
Jobs cast it as a holy crusade: "IBM was essentially Microsoft at its

worst. They were nota force for innovation; they were a force for evil.
Theywere like ATT orMicrosoft or Google is."
Unfortunately for Apple, Jobs also took aim at another perceived com
petitor to his Macintosh: the company's own Lisa. Partly it was psy
chological. He had been ousted from that group, and now he wanted
to beat it. He also saw healthy rivalry as a way to motivate his troops.

That's why hebetJohn Couch $5,000 thatthe Mac would ship before
the Lisa. The problem was that the rivalry became unhealthy. Jobs re
peatedly portrayed his band ofengineers as the cool kids on the block,
in contrast to the plodding HP engineer types working on the Lisa.
More substantively, when hemoved away from JefRaskin's plan for
an inexpensive and underpowered portable appliance and reconceived
the Mac as a desktop machine with a graphical user interface, it be
came a scaled-down version of the Lisa that would likely undercut it
in the marketplace.

Larry Tesler, who managed application software for the Lisa, real
ized that it would be important to design both machines to use many

of the same software programs. So to broker peace, he arranged for
Smith and Hertzfeld to cometo the Lisawork space and demonstrate

the Mac prototype. Twenty-five engineers showed up and were listen
ing politely when, halfway into the presentation, the door burst open.
It was Rich Page, a volatile engineer who was responsible for much
of the Lisa's design. "The Macintosh is going to destroy the Lisa!" he
shouted. "The Macintosh is going to ruinApple!" Neither Smith nor
Hertzfeld responded, so Page continued his rant. "Jobs wants to de-

Building the Mac

137

stroy Lisa because we wouldn't lethim control it," he said, looking as if
he were about to cry. "Nobody's going tobuy aLisa because they know
the Mac is coming! But you don't care!" He stormed out of the room

and slammed the door, buta moment later he barged back inbriefly. "I
know it'snotyour fault," hesaid to Smith and Hertzfeld. "Steve Jobs is
the problem. Tell Steve thathe's destroying Apple!"
Jobs did indeed make the Macintosh into a low-cost competitor
to the Lisa, one with incompatible software. Making matters worse
was that neither machine was compatible with the Apple II. With no
one in overall charge at Apple, there was no chance ofkeeping Jobs in
harness.

End-to-end Control

Jobs's reluctance to make the Mac compatible with the architecture
ofthe Lisa was motivated by more than rivalry or revenge. There was
a philosophical component, one that was related to his penchant for
control. He believed thatfor a computer to be truly great, itshardware

and its software had to be tightly linked. When a computer was open
to running software thatalso worked onother computers, it would end
up sacrificing some functionality. The best products, he believed, were
"whole widgets" that were designed end-to-end, with the software
closely tailored to the hardwareand viceversa. This is what would dis

tinguish the Macintosh, which had an operating system that worked
only on its own hardware, from the environment that Microsoft was

creating, in which its operating system could be used on hardware
made bymany different companies.
"Jobs is a strong-willed, elitist artist who doesn't want his cre

ations mutated inauspiciously by unworthy programmers," explained
ZDNet's editor Dan Farber. "It would be as if someone off the street

added some brush strokes to a Picasso painting or changed the lyrics
to a Dylan song." In later years Jobs's whole-widget approach would
distinguish the iPhone, iPod, and iPad from their competitors. It re
sulted inawesome products. But itwas not always the best strategy for
dominating a market. "From the first Mac to the latest iPhone, Jobs's

138

Walter Isaacson

systems have always been sealed shut to prevent consumers from med
dling and modifying them," noted Leander Kahney, author of Cult of
the Mac.

Jobs's desire to control the user experience had been at the heart of
his debate with Wozniak over whether the Apple II would have slots
that allow a user to plug expansion cards into a computer's mother
board and thus add some newfunctionality. Wozniak won that argu

ment: TheApple II had eight slots. But this time around it would be
Jobs's machine, not Wozniak's, and the Macintosh would have limited
slots. You wouldn't even be able to open the case and get to the moth
erboard. For a hobbyist or hacker, that was uncool. But for Jobs, the
Macintosh was for the masses. He wanted to give them a controlled
experience.

"It reflects his personality, which is to want control," said Berry
Cash, who was hired byJobs in1982 tobeamarket strategist atTexaco
Towers. "Steve would talkabout the Apple II andcomplain, 'We don't
have control, andlook at all these crazy things people are trying to do
to it.That's a mistake I'll never make again.'" He wentsofar asto de

sign special tools so that the Macintosh case could not be opened with
a regular screwdriver. "We're going to design this thing so nobody but
Apple employees can get inside this box," he told Cash.
Jobs also decided to eliminate the cursor arrow keys ontheMacin
tosh keyboard. Theonly way to move the cursor was to use themouse.
It was away offorcing old-fashioned users toadapt topoint-and-click
navigation, even ifthey didn't want to. Unlike other product develop
ers, Jobs did not believe the customer was always right; if they wanted
to resist using a mouse, theywere wrong.

Therewas one other advantage, hebelieved, to eliminating the cur
sor keys: It forced outside software developers to write programs spe

cially for the Mac operating system, rather than merely writing generic
software that could be ported to a variety of computers. That made
for the type oftight vertical integration between application software,
operating systems, and hardware devices that Jobs liked.
Jobs's desire for end-to-end control also made him allergic to pro

posals that Apple license the Macintosh operating system to other office
equipment manufacturers and allow them to make Macintosh clones.

Building the Mac

139

The new and energetic Macintosh marketing director Mike Murray
proposed a licensing program in a confidential memo toJobs in May
1982. "We would like the Macintosh user environment to become an

industrystandard," he wrote. "The hitch,ofcourse, is that nowone must

buy Mac hardware inorder toget this user environment. Rarely (ifever)
has one company been able to create and maintain an industry-wide
standard that cannot be shared with other manufacturers." His proposal
was to license theMacintosh operating system toTandy. Because Tan
dy's Radio Shack stores went after adifferent type ofcustomer, Murray
argued, it would notseverely cannibalize Apple sales. ButJobs was congenitally averse to such a plan. His approach meant that the Macintosh
remained a controlled environment that met his standards, but it also

meant that, as Murray feared, itwould have trouble securing its place as
an industry standardin a world of IBM clones.

Machines ofthe Year

As 1982 drew to a close, Jobs came to believe that he was going to be
Times Man ofthe Year. He arrived atTexaco Towers one day with the
magazine's San Francisco bureau chief, Michael Moritz, and encour

aged colleagues togive Moritz interviews. ButJobs did not end up on
the cover. Instead the magazine chose "the Computer" as the topic for
the year-end issue and calledit "the Machine of the Year."

Accompanying the main story was a profile of Jobs, which was

based on the reporting done by Moritz and written by Jay Cocks, an
editor who usually handled rock music for the magazine. "With his
smooth sales pitch and a blind faith that would have been the envy
of the early Christian martyrs, it is Steven Jobs, more than anyone,
who kicked open the door and let the personal computer move in,"
the story proclaimed. It was a richly reported piece, but also harsh at
times—so harsh that Moritz (after he wrote a book about Apple and
went on to be a partner in theventure firm Sequoia Capital with Don

Valentine) repudiated it by complaining that his reporting had been
"siphoned, filtered, and poisoned with gossipy benzene by an editor in
New York whose regular task was to chronicle the wayward world of

140

Walter Isaacson

rock-and-roll music." The article quoted BudTribble onJobs's "reality
distortion field" and noted that he "wouldoccasionally burst into tears

at meetings." Perhaps the best quote came from Jef Raskin. Jobs, he
declared, "would have made an excellent Kingof France."
To Jobs's dismay, the magazine made public the existence of the

daughter he had forsaken, Lisa Brennan. He knew that Kottke had
been the one to tell the magazine about Lisa, and he berated him in

the Mac group work space in front of a halfdozen people.. "When
the Time reporter asked me if Steve had a daughter named Lisa, I
said 'Of course,'" Kottke recalled. "Friends don't let friends deny that

they're the father of a child. I'm not going to let my friend be a jerk
and deny paternity. He was really angry and felt violated and told me
in front of everyone that I had betrayed him."
Butwhattruly devastated Jobs was that hewas not,after all, chosen
as the Man of the Year. As he later told me:

Time decided they were going to make me Man of the Year, and I
was twenty-seven, so I actually cared about stuff like that. I thought it
was pretty cool. They sent outMike Moritz to write a story. We're the
same age, and I had been very successful, and I could tell hewas jealous
andthere was anedge to him. Hewrote this terrible hatchet job. Sothe
editors in New York getthis story andsay, "We can't make thisguy Man
of the Year." That really hurt. But it was a good lesson. It taught me to
never get too excited about things like that, since the media is a circus

anyway. They FedExed me the magazine, and I remember opening the
package, thoroughly expecting to see my mug on the cover, and it was
this computer sculpture thing. I thought, "Huh?" And then I read the
article,and it was so awful that I actually cried.

In fact there's no reason to believe that Moritz wasjealous or that

he intended his reporting to be unfair. Nor was Jobs ever slated to
be Man of the Year, despite what he thought. That year the top edi
tors (I was then a junior editor there) decided early on to gowith the
computer rather than aperson, and they commissioned, months in ad
vance, a piece of art from the famous sculptor George Segal to be a
gatefold cover image. Ray Cave was then the magazine's editor. "We

Building the Mac

141

never considered Jobs," he said. "You couldn't personify the computer,
so thatwas the first time we decided to go with an inanimate object.
We never searched around for a face to beput on the cover."

Apple launched the Lisa inJanuary 1983—a full year before the Mac
was ready—and Jobs paid his $5,000 wager to Couch. Even though he
was not part of the Lisa team, Jobs went to New York to do publicity
for it in his role as Apple's chairman and poster boy.
Hehad learned from his public relations consultant Regis McKenna
how to dole out exclusive interviews in a dramatic manner. Reporters
from anointed publications were ushered in sequentially for their hour
with him inhis Carlyle Hotel suite, where aLisa computer was set ona
table and surrounded by cut flowers. The publicity plan called for Jobs
tofocus on the Lisa and not mention the Macintosh, because specula
tion about it could undermine the Lisa. But Jobs couldn't help him
self. In most ofthe stories based on his interviews that day—in Timey
Business Week, the Wall Street Journal, and Fortune—the Macintosh

was mentioned. "Later this year Apple will introduce a less powerful,
less expensive version ofLisa, the Macintosh," Fortune reported. "Jobs

himself has directed that project." Business Week quoted him as saying,
"When it comes out, Mac is going to be the most incredible computer
in the world." He also admitted that the Mac and the Lisa would not

be compatible. It was like launching the Lisa with the kiss of death.

The Lisa did indeed die a slow death. Within two years it would
be discontinued. "Itwas too expensive, and we were trying to sell it to
big companies when our expertise was selling to consumers,"Jobs later
said. But there was a silver lining for Jobs: Within months of Lisa's

launch, it became clear that Apple had topin its hopes on the Macin
tosh instead.

Let's Be Pirates!

As the Macintosh team grew, it moved from Texaco Towers to the

main Apple buildings on Bandley Drive, finally settling in mid-1983
into Bandley 3.It had a modern atrium lobby with video games, which

142

Walt e r.Isaac son

Burrell Smith andAndy Hertzfeld chose, and aToshiba compact disc

stereo system with MartinLogan speakers and a hundred CDs. The
software teamwas visible from the lobby in a fishbowl-like glass enclo
sure, and the kitchen was stocked daily with Odwalla juices. Over time
the atrium attracted even more toys, most notably a Bosendorfer piano
anda BMWmotorcycle thatJobs felt would inspire an obsession with
lapidary craftsmanship.

Jobs kept a tight rein on the hiring process. The goal was to get

people who were creative, wickedly smart, and slighdy rebellious. The
software team would make applicants play Defender, Smith's favorite

video game. Jobs would ask his usual offbeat questions to see how well
the applicant could think inunexpected situations. One day he, Hertz
feld, and Smith interviewed a candidate for software manager who, it
became clear as soon as he walked in the room, was too uptight and
conventional to manage the wizards in the fishbowl. Jobs began to toy

with him mercilessly. "How old were you when you lost your virginity?"
he asked.

The candidate looked baffled. "What did you say?"

"Are you a virgin?" Jobs asked. The candidate sat there flustered,
so Jobs changed the subject. "How many times have you taken LSD?"
Hertzfeld recalled, "The poor guy was turning varying shades of red,
so I tried to change the subject and asked a straightforward technical
question." But when the candidate droned on in his response, Jobs
broke in. "Gobble, gobble, gobble, gobble," he said, cracking up Smith
and Hertzfeld.

"I guess I'm not the right guy," the poor man said as he got up to
leave.

For all of his obnoxious behavior, Jobs also had the ability to instill in

his team an esprit de corps. After tearing people down, he would find
ways tolift them up and make them feel that being part ofthe Macin
tosh project was an amazing mission. Every six months he would take
most of his team on a two-day retreat at a nearby resort.

The retreat in September 1982 was at thePajaro Dunes near Mon
terey. Fifty orso members ofthe Mac division sat in the lodge facing a

Building the Mac

143

fireplace. Jobs sat on top ofa table infront ofthem. He spoke quiedy
for awhile, then walked to an easel and began posting his thoughts.
The first was "Don't compromise." It was aninjunction thatwould,
over time, be both helpful and harmful. Mosttechnology teams made
trade-offs. The Mac, on the other hand, would end up being as "in
sanely great" as Jobs and his acolytes could possibly make it—but it
would not ship for another sixteen months, way behind schedule. After
mentioning a scheduled completion date, he told them, "It would be

better to miss than to turn out the wrong thing." A different type of
project manager, willing to make some trade-offs, might tryto lock in
dates after which no changes could be made. Not Jobs. He displayed
another maxim: "It's not done until it ships."
Another chart contained a koan-like phrase that he later told me
was his favorite maxim: "Thejourney isthe reward." The Macteam, he
liked to emphasize, was a special corps withan exalted mission. Some

day they would all look back on their journey together and, forgetting
or laughing offthe painful moments, would regard it as amagical high
point in their lives.

At the end ofthe presentation someone asked whether he thought
they should do some market research to see what customers wanted.

"No," he replied, "because customers don't know what they want until
we've shown them." Then he pulled out a device that was about the
size of a desk diary. "Do you want to see something neat?" When he
flipped it open, it turned out tobe a mock-up ofacomputer thatcould

fit onyour lap, with akeyboard and screen hinged together like a note
book. "This is my dream ofwhat we will be making in the mid- to late
eighties," hesaid. They were building acompany thatwould invent the
future.

For the next two days there were presentations by various team
leaders and theinfluential computer industry analyst Ben Rosen, with
a lotoftime in the evenings for pool parties and dancing. At the end,

Jobs stood in front ofthe assemblage and gave a soliloquy. "As every
day passes, the work fifty people are doing here is going to send agiant
ripple through the universe," he said. "I know I might be a litde hard
to get along with, butthis is the most fun thing I've done in my life."

144

Walter Isaacson

Years later most of those in the audience would be able to laugh about

the "little hard to get along with" episodes and agree with him that
creating thatgiant ripple was the most fun they had in their lives.
The next retreat was at the end ofJanuary 1983, the same month
the Lisa launched, and there was a shift in tone. Four months earlier

Jobs hadwritten on his flip chart: "Don't compromise." This time one
of the maxims was "Real artists ship." Nerves were frayed. Atkinson
had been left out of the publicity interviews for the Lisa launch, and
he marched into Jobs's hotel room and threatened to quit. Jobs tried
to minimize the slight, but Atkinson refused to be mollified. Jobs got
annoyed. "I don't have time todeal with this now," hesaid. "I have sixty
other people out there who are pouring their hearts into the Macin
tosh, and they're waiting for me to start the meeting." With that he
brushed past Atkinson to go address the faithful.
Jobs proceeded to give a rousing speech in which he claimed that
he had resolved the dispute with Mcintosh audio labs to use theMac
intosh name. (In fact the issue was stillbeingnegotiated, but the mo
ment called for a bit of the old reality distortion field.) He pulled out
a botde of mineral water and symbolically christened the prototype

onstage. Down the hall, Atkinson heard the loud cheer, and with asigh
joined the group. The ensuing party featured skinny-dipping in the
pool, abonfire on the beach, and loud music that lasted all night, which
caused the hotel, LaPlaya in Carmel, to ask them never to come back.
Another ofJobs's maxims at the retreat was "It'sbetterto be a pirate

than to join the navy." He wanted to instill a rebel spirit in his team,
to have them behave likeswashbucklers whowere proud of their work

but willing to commandeer from others. As Susan Kare put it, "He
meant, 'Let's have a renegade feeling to our group. We can move fast.
We can get things done.'" To celebrate Jobs's birthday a few weeks
later, the team paid for a billboard on the road to Apple headquarters.
It read: "Happy 28th Steve. The Journey is the Reward.—The Pirates."
One of the Mac team's programmers, Steve Capps, decided this
new spirit warranted hoisting aJolly Roger. He cut a patch ofblack
cloth and had Kare paint a skull and crossbones on it.The eye patch
she putonthe skull was an Apple logo. Late one Sunday night Capps
climbed to the roofoftheir newly built Bandley 3 building andhoisted

Building the Mac

145

the flag on a scaffolding pole that the construction workers had left
behind. It waved proudly for a few weeks, until members of the Lisa
team, in a late-night foray, stole the flag and sent their Mac rivals a
ransom note. Capps led a raid to recover it and was able to wrestle it
from a secretary who was guarding it for the Lisa team. Some of the

grown-ups overseeing Apple worried that Jobs's buccaneer spirit was
getting out of hand. "Flying that flag was really stupid," said Arthur
Rock. "It was telling the rest of the company theywere no good." But
Jobs loved it, and he made sure it waved proudly all the way through
to the completion of the Macproject. "We were the renegades, andwe
wanted people to know it," he recalled.

Veterans of the Mac team had learned that they could stand up to
Jobs. If they knewwhat theywere talking about, he would tolerate the
pushback, even admire it. By1983 those most familiar with his reality
distortion field had discovered something further: They could, if nec
essary, just quiedydisregard what he decreed. If they turned out to be
right, he would appreciate their renegade attitude and willingness to
ignore authority. After all,that's what he did.
Byfar the most importantexample of this involved the choice of a
diskdrive for the Macintosh. Apple had a corporate division that built
mass-storage devices, and it had developed a disk-drive system, codenamed Twiggy, that could read and write onto those thin, delicate
S^-inch floppy disks that older readers (who also remember Twiggy

the model) will recall. But by the time the Lisa was ready to ship in
the spring of 1983, it was clear that theTwiggy was buggy. Because the
Lisa also came with a hard-disk drive, this was not a complete disaster.
But the Mac had no hard disk, so it faced a crisis. "The Mac team was

beginning to panic," said Hertzfeld. "We were using a single Twiggy
drive, and we didn't have a hard disk to fall back on."

The team discussed the problem at the January 1983 retreat, and
Debi Coleman gave Jobs data about the Twiggy failure rate. A few
days later he drove to Apple's factory in San Jose to see the Twiggy
being made. More than halfwere rejected. Jobs erupted. With his face
flushed, he began shouting and sputtering about firing everyone who
worked there. Bob Belleville, the head of the Mac engineering team,

146

Walter Isaacson

gently guided him to the parking lot,where theycould take a walk and
talk about alternatives.

One possibility that Belleville had been exploring was to use a new
3%-inch disk drive that Sony had developed. The disk was cased in
sturdier plastic and could fit into a shirt pocket. Another option was
to have a cloneof Sony's 3%-inch diskdrive manufactured by a smaller
Japanese supplier, the Alps Electronics Co.,which had beensupplying
disk drives for the AppleII. Alps had already licensed the technology
from Sony, and if they could build their own version in time it would
be much cheaper.
Jobs and Belleville, along with Apple veteran Rod Holt (the guy
Jobs enlisted to design the first power supply for the Apple II), flew to
Japan to figure out what to do. Theytook the bullet train from Tokyo
to visit the Alpsfacility. The engineers theredidn'teven have aworking
prototype, just a crude model. Jobs thought it was great, but Belleville
was appalled. There was no way, he thought, that Alps could have it
readyfor the Mac within a year.
As they proceeded to visit otherJapanese companies, Jobs was on
his worstbehavior. He wore jeans and sneakers to meetings withJapa
nese managers in dark suits. When they formally handed him litde
gifts, as was the custom, he often left them behind, and he never re
ciprocated with gifts of his own. He would sneer when rows of en
gineers lined up to greet him, bow, and politely offer their products
for inspection. Jobs hated both the devices and the obsequiousness.
"What are you showing me this for?" he snapped at one stop. "This
is a piece of crap! Anybody could build a better drive than this." Al
though most of his hosts were appalled, some seemed amused. They
had heard tales of his obnoxious style and brash behavior, and now
they were getting to seeit in full display.
The final stop was the Sony factory, located in a drab suburb of
Tokyo. ToJobs, it looked messy and inelegant. A lot of the workwas
done by hand. He hated it. Back at the hotel, Belleville argued for
going with the Sony disk drive. It was ready to use. Jobs disagreed. He
decided that they would work with Alps to produce their own drive,
and he ordered Belleville to cease all work with Sony.

Belleville decided it was best to partially ignore Jobs, and he asked

Building the Mac

147

a Sonyexecutive to get its diskdrive ready for usein the Macintosh. If
and when it became clear that Alps could not deliver on time, Apple
would switch to Sony. So Sony sent over the engineer who had devel
opedthe drive, Hidetoshi Komoto, a Purdue graduate who fortunately
possessed a good sense of humor about his clandestine task.
Whenever Jobs would come from his corporate office to visit the
Mac team's engineers—which was almost every afternoon—they
would hurriedly find somewhere for Komoto to hide. At one point
Jobs ran into him at a newsstand in Cupertino and recognized him
from the meeting inJapan, but he didn't suspect anything. The closest
call was when Jobs came busding onto the Macwork space unexpect
edlyone daywhile Komoto was sittingin one of the cubicles. A Mac
engineer grabbed him and pointed him to a janitorial closet. "Quick,
hide in this closet. Please! Now!" Komoto looked confused, Hertzfeld
recalled, but hejumped up anddidas told. He hadto stay in the closet
for five minutes, untilJobs left. The Mac engineers apologized. "No
problem," he replied. "ButAmerican business practices, they are very
strange.Verystrange."

Belleville's prediction came true. In May 1983 the folks at Alps
admitted it would take them at least eighteen more months to get
their clone of the Sony drive into production. At a retreat in Pajaro
Dunes, Markkula grilled Jobs on what he was going to do. Finally,
Belleville interrupted and said that he might have an alternative to the
Alps drive ready soon. Jobs looked baffled for justa moment, andthen
it became clear to him why he'd glimpsed Sony's top disk designer
in Cupertino. "You son of a bitch!" Jobs said. But it was not in anger.
There was a big grin on his face. As soonas he realized what Belleville
and the other engineers had done behind his back, said Hertzfeld,

"Steve swallowed his pride and thanked them for disobeying him and
doing the right thing." It was, after all, what he would have done in
their situation.

chapter

fourteen

ENTER SCULLEY
The Pepsi Challenge

With John Sculley, 1984

The Courtship
Mike Markkula had never wanted to be Apple's president. He liked

designing his new houses, flying his private plane, andliving high off
his stock options; he did not relish adjudicating conflict or curating
high-maintenance egos. He hadstepped intothe role reluctantly, after
he felt compelled to ease outMike Scott, and he promised his wife the
gig would betemporary. By theend of1982, after almost two years, she
gave him an order: Find a replacement right away.
Jobs knewthat he was not ready to run the company himself, even
though there was a part of him that wanted to try. Despite his arro148

The Launch

167

six hours of sleep, he drove back to the office. He wanted to check in

to see if there had been any problems, and most ofhis colleagues had
done the same. Theywere lounging around, dazed but excited, when
Jobs walked in. "Hey, pick yourselves up offthe floor, you're not done

yet!" he announced. "We need a demo for the intro!" His plan was
to dramatically unveil the Macintosh in front of a large audience and
have it show offsome of its features to the inspirational theme from
Chariots ofFire. "It needs to be done by the weekend, to be ready for
the rehearsals," he added. They all groaned, Hertzfeld recalled, "but

as we talked we realized that it would be fun to cook up something
impressive."

Thelaunch event was scheduled for the Apple annual stockholders'
meeting on January 24—eight days away—at the Flint Auditorium

of De Anza Community College. The television ad and the frenzy
ofpress preview stories were the first two components in what would
become the Steve Jobs playbook for making the introduction of a new
product seem like anepochal moment inworld history. Thethird com
ponent was the public unveiling of the product itself, amid fanfare and

flourishes, infront ofan audience ofadoring faithful mixed with jour
nalists who were primed to beswept up in the excitement.

Hertzfeld pulled offthe remarkable feat ofwriting a music player
intwo days so that the computer could play the Chariots ofFire theme.
But when Jobs heard it, he judged it lousy, so they decided to use a
recording instead. At the same time, Jobs was thrilled with a speech
generator that turned text into spoken words with a charming elec
tronic accent, and he decided to make it part of the demo. "I want the
Macintosh to be the first computer to introduce itself!" he insisted.

At the rehearsal the night before the launch, nothing was working
well. Jobs hated the way the animation scrolled across the Macintosh
screen, and he kept ordering tweaks. He also was dissatisfied with the
stage lighting, and he directed Sculley to move from seat to seat to

give his opinion as various adjustments^were made. Sculley had never
thought much about variations ofstage lighting and gave the type of
tentative answers a patientmightgive an eye doctor when asked which

lens made the letters clearer. The rehearsals and changes went on for
five hours, well into the night. "He was driving people insane, getting

168

Walter Isaacson

mad at the stagehands for every glitch in the presentation," Sculley
recalled. "I thought there was no way we were going to getit done for
the show the next morning."

Most of all, Jobs fretted about his presentation. Sculley fancied

himself a good writer, so he suggested changes in Jobs's script. Jobs
recalled being slightly annoyed, but their relationship was still in the

phase when he was lathering on flattery and stroking Sculley's ego. "I
think ofyou just like Woz and Markkula," he told Sculley. "You're like
one of the founders of the company. They founded the company, but
you and I are founding thefuture." Sculley lapped it up.
The next morning the 2,600-seat auditorium was mobbed. Jobs
arrived in a double-breasted blue blazer, a starched white shirt, and a

pale green bow tie. "This is the most important moment in my entire
life," hetold Sculley as they waited backstage for theprogram to begin.
"I'm really nervous. You're probably the only person who knows how
I feel about this." Sculley grasped his hand, held it for a moment, and
whispered "Goodluck."
As chairman of the company, Jobs went onstage first to start the
shareholders' meeting. He did so with his own form of an invoca

tion. "I'd like to open the meeting," he said, "with a twenty-year-old
poem by Dylan—that's Bob Dylan." He broke into alittle smile, then
looked down to read from the second verse of "The Times They Are

a-Changin." His voice was high-pitched as he raced through the ten
lines, ending with "For the loser now / Will be later to win / For the
times they are a-changin." That song was the anthem that kept the
multimillionaire board chairman in touch with his counterculture self-

image. He had a bootleg copy ofhis favorite version, which was from
thelive concert Dylan performed, with Joan Baez, on Halloween 1964
at Lincoln Center's Philharmonic Hall.

Sculley came onstage to report on the company's earnings, and the
audience started to become restless as he droned on. Finally, he ended

with a personal note. "The most important thing that has happened
to me in the last nine months at Apple has been a chance to develop
a friendship with Steve Jobs," he said. "For me, the rapport we have
developed means an awful lot."
Thelights dimmed as Jobs reappeared onstage and launched into a

The Launch

169

dramatic version ofthe battle cry he had delivered at the Hawaii sales

conference. "It is 1958," he began. "IBM passes up achance to buy a
young fledgling company that has invented a new technology called
xerography. Two years later, Xerox was born, and IBM has beenkick

ing themselves ever since." The crowd laughed. Hertzfeld had heard
versions ofthe speech bothin Hawaii and elsewhere, but hewas struck

by how this time it was pulsing with more passion. After recounting
other IBM missteps, Jobs picked up the pace and the emotion as he
builttoward the present:

It is now 1984. It appears that IBM wants it all. Apple is perceived to
be the only hope to offer IBM a run for its money. Dealers, after ini
tially welcoming IBM with open arms, now fear an IBM-dominated

and -controlled future and are turning back to Apple as the only force
who can ensure their future freedom. IBM wants it all, and is aiming
its guns at its last obstacle to industry control, Apple. Will Big Blue
dominate the entire computer industry? The entire information age?
Was George Orwell right?

As he built to the climax, the audience went from murmuring
to applauding to a frenzy ofcheering and chanting. But before they
could answer the Orwell question, the auditorium went black and the

"1984" commercial appeared on the screen. When itwas over, the en
tire audience was onits feet cheering.

With aflair for the dramatic, Jobs walked across the dark stage to a
small table with acloth bag on it. "Now I'd like to show you Macintosh
in person," he said. He took out the computer, keyboard, and mouse,
hooked them together deftly, then pulled one of the new 3%-inch

floppies from his shirt pocket. The theme from Chariots ofFire began
to play. Jobs held his breath for a moment, because the demo had not

worked well the night before. But this time itran flawlessly. The word
"MACINTOSH" scrolled horizontally onscreen, then underneath it

the words "Insanely great" appeared in script, as ifbeing slowly writ
ten by hand. Not used to such beautiful graphic displays, the audience
quieted for amoment. Afew gasps could be heard. And then, in rapid
succession, came a series of screen shots: Bill Atkinson's QuickDraw

170

Walter Isaacson

graphics package followed by displays ofdifferent fonts, documents,
charts, drawings, achess game, aspreadsheet, and arendering ofSteve
Jobs with a thought bubble containing aMacintosh.
Whenitwas over,Jobs smiled and offered a treat. "We've done alot

oftalking about Macintosh recently," he said. "But today, for the first
time ever, I'd like to let Macintosh speak for itself." With that, he
strolled back over to the computer, pressed the button on the mouse,
and in a vibrato but endearing electronic deep voice, Macintosh be

came the first computer to introduce itself. "Hello. I'm Macintosh. It

sure is great to get out of that bag," itbegan. The only thing it didn't
seem to knowhow to do was to wait for the wild cheering and shrieks

that erupted. Instead ofbasking for amoment, itbarreled ahead. "Un
accustomed as I am to public speaking, I'd like to share with you a

maxim I thought ofthe first time I met an IBM mainframe: Never
trust a computer you can't lift." Once again the roar almost drowned
out its final lines. "Obviously, I can talk. But right now I'd like to sit
back andlisten. Soit iswithconsiderable pride that I introduce a man
who's been like a father to me, SteveJobs."

Pandemonium erupted, with people in the crowd jumping up and
down and pumping their fists in afrenzy. Jobs nodded slowly, atight-

lipped but broad smile on his face, then looked down and started to
choke up. Theovation continued for five minutes.
After the Macintosh team returned to Bandley 3 that afternoon, a

truck pulled into the parking lot and Jobs had them all gather next to
it. Inside were a hundred new Macintosh computers, each personal

ized with a plaque. "Steve presented them one ata time to each team
member, with a handshake and a smile, as the rest ofus stood around
cheering," Hertzfeld recalled. It had been a grueling ride, and many
egos had been bruised by Jobs's obnoxious and rough management
style. But neither Raskin nor Wozniak nor Sculley nor anyone else
at the company could have pulled off the creation ofthe Macintosh.
Nor would it likely have emerged from focus groups and committees.
On the day he unveiled the Macintosh, areporter from Popular Science
asked Jobs what type ofmarket research he had done. Jobs responded
by scoffing, "Did Alexander Graham Bell do any market research be
fore he invented the telephone?"

CHAPTER

SIXTEEN

GATES AND JOBS
When Orbits Intersect

Jobs and Gates, 1991

The Macintosh Partnership
In astronomy, a binary system occurs when the orbits of two stars are
linked because oftheir gravitational interaction. There have been anal

ogous situations in history, when an era is shaped by the relationship
and rivalry oftwo orbiting superstars: Albert Einstein and Niels Bohr

in twentieth-century physics, for example, or Thomas Jefferson and

Alexander Hamilton in early American governance. For the first thirty
years of the personal computer age, beginning in the late 1970s, the

defining binary star system was composed of two high-energy college
dropouts both born in 1955.
171

172

Walter Isaacson

Bill Gates and Steve Jobs, despite their similar ambitions at the

confluence oftechnology and business, had very different personalities
and backgrounds. Gates's father was a prominent Seattle lawyer, his
mother a civic leader on a variety of prestigious boards. He became a

tech geek atthe area's finest private school, Lakeside High, but he was
never arebel, hippie, spiritual seeker, or member ofthe counterculture.
Instead ofa Blue Box to rip off the phone company, Gates created for
his school aprogram for scheduling classes, which helped him get into
ones with the right girls, and a car-counting program for local traffic
engineers. He went to Harvard, and when he decided to drop out it
was not to find enlightenment with an Indian guru butto start a com
puter software company.

Gates was good atcomputer coding, unlike Jobs, and his mind was
more practical, disciplined, and abundant in analytic processing power.
Jobs was more intuitive and romantic and had a greater instinct for

making technology usable, design delightful, and interfaces friendly.
He had apassion for perfection, which made him fiercely demanding,
and he managed by charisma and scattershot intensity. Gates was more
methodical; he held tightly scheduled product review meetings where
he would cut to the heart of issues with lapidary skill. Both could be

rude, but with Gates—who early inhis career seemed tohave atypical
geek's flirtation with the fringes ofthe Asperger's scale—the cutting
behavior tended to be less personal, based more on intellectual incisiveness than emotional callousness. Jobs would stare at people with a

burning, wounding intensity; Gates sometimes had trouble making eye
contact, but he was fundamentally humane.

"Each one thought he was smarter than the other one, but Steve

generally treated Bill as someone who was slightly inferior, especially
in matters oftaste and style," said Andy Hertzfeld. "Bill looked down
on Steve because he couldn't actually program." From the beginning

oftheir relationship, Gates was fascinated byJobs and slightly envious
ofhis mesmerizing effect on people. But he also found him "funda
mentally odd" and "weirdly flawed as ahuman being," and he was put

off by Jobs's rudeness and his tendency to be "either in the mode of
saying you were shit or trying to seduce you." For his part, Jobs found
Gates unnervingly narrow. "He'd be a broader guy ifhe had dropped

Gates and Jobs

173

acid once or gone off to an ashram when he was younger," Jobs once
declared.

Their differences in personality and character would lead them to
opposite sides of what would become the fundamental divide in the

digital age.Jobs was aperfectionist who craved control and indulged in
the uncompromising temperament ofan artist; he and Apple became
the exemplars of a digital strategy that tightly integrated hardware,
software, and content into a seamless package. Gates was a smart, cal

culating, and pragmatic analyst ofbusiness and technology; he was
open to licensing Microsoft's operating system and software to a vari
ety of manufacturers.

After thirty years Gates would develop agrudging respect for Jobs.

"He really never knew much about technology, but he had an amazing
instinct for what works," he said. But Jobs never reciprocated by fully
appreciating Gates's real strengths. "Bill is basically unimaginative and
has never invented anything, which is why I think he's more comfort

able now in philanthropy than technology,"Jobs said, unfairly. "He just
shamelessly ripped offother people's ideas."

When the Macintosh was first being developed, Jobs went up to visit
Gates at his office near Seattle. Microsoft had written some applica
tions for the Apple II, including a spreadsheet program called Multiplan, and Jobs wanted to excite Gates and Co. about doing even
more for the forthcoming Macintosh. Sitting in Gates's conference
room, Jobs spun an enticing vision ofa computer for the masses, with
a friendly interface, which would be churned out by the millions in

an automated California factory. His description ofthe dream factory
sucking in the California silicon components and turning out finished

Macintoshes caused the Microsoft team to code-name the project
"Sand." They even reverse-engineered it into an acronym, for "Steve's
amazing new device."

Gates had launched Microsoft by writing a version of BASIC,
a programming language, for the Altair. Jobs wanted Microsoft to
write a version of BASIC for the Macintosh, because Wozniak—

despite much prodding by Jobs—had never enhanced his version of

the Apple lis BASIC to handle floating-point numbers. In addition,

174

Walter Isaacson

Jobs wanted Microsoft to write application software—such as word
processing and spreadsheet programs—for the Macintosh. At the
time, Jobs was a king and Gates still acourtier: In 1982 Apple's annual
sales were $1 billion, while Microsoft's were a mere $32 million. Gates

signed on to do graphical versions ofanew spreadsheet called Excel, a
word-processing program called Word, and BASIC.
Gates frequently went to Cupertino for demonstrations of the
Macintosh operating system, and he was not very impressed. "I re
member the first time we went down, Steve had this app where it was

just things bouncing around on the screen," he said. "That was the only
app that ran." Gates was also put offbyJobs's attitude. "It was kind of
a weird seduction visit, where Steve was saying, 'We don't really need

you and we're doing this great thing, and it's under the cover.' He's in
his Steve Jobs sales mode, butkind ofthe sales mode that also says, 'I
don't need you, butI might letyou beinvolved.'"
The Macintosh pirates found Gates hard to take. "You could tell
that Bill Gates was not a very good listener. He couldn't bear to have

anyone explain how something worked to him—he had to leap ahead
instead and guess about how he thought itwould work," Hertzfeld re
called. They showed him how the Macintosh's cursor moved smoothly
across the screen without flickering. "What kind of hardware do you
use to draw the cursor?" Gates asked. Hertzfeld, who took great pride

that they could achieve their functionality solely using software, re

plied, "We don't have any special hardware for it!" Gates insisted that
it was necessary to have special hardware to move the cursor thatway.
"So what do you say to somebody like that?" Bruce Horn, one ofthe
Macintosh engineers, later said. "It made it clear to me that Gates
was not the kind of person that would understand or appreciate the
elegance of a Macintosh."

Despite their mutual wariness, both teams were excited by the pros
pect that Microsoft would create graphical software for the Macintosh
that would take personal computing into a new realm, and they went
to dinner at a fancy restaurant to celebrate. Microsoft soon dedicated
a large team to the task. "We had more people working on the Mac
than he did," Gates said. "Hehad about fourteen or fifteen people. We

had like twenty people. We really bet our life on it." And even though

Gates andJobs

175

Jobs thought that they didn't exhibit much taste, the Microsoft pro
grammers were persistent. "They came outwith applications thatwere

terrible," Jobs recalled, "but they kept atit and they made them better."
Eventually Jobs became so enamored of Excel that he made a secret

bargain with Gates: IfMicrosoft would make Excel exclusively for the
Macintosh for two years, and not make a version for IBM PCs, then
Jobs would shut down his team working on a version of BASIC for
the Macintosh and instead indefinitely license Microsoft's BASIC.

Gates smartly took the deal, which infuriated the Apple team whose
project got canceled and gave Microsoft alever in future negotiations.
For the time being, Gates and Jobs forged a bond. That summer

they went to a conference hosted by the industry analyst Ben Rosen
at a Playboy Club retreat in Lake Geneva, Wisconsin, where nobody
knew about the graphical interfaces that Apple was developing. "Ev
erybody was acting like the IBM PC was everything, which was nice,
but Steve and I were kind of smiling that, hey, we've got something,"
Gates recalled. "And he's kind of leaking, but nobody actually caught
on." Gates became a regular at Apple retreats. "I went to every luau,"
said Gates. "I was part of the crew."

Gates enjoyed his frequent visits to Cupertino, where he got to
watch Jobs interact erratically with his employees and display his ob
sessions. "Steve was in his ultimate pied piper mode, proclaiming how
the Mac will change the world and overworking people like mad, with
incredible tensions and complex personal relationships." Sometimes
Jobs would begin on a high, then lapse into sharing his fears with
Gates. "We'd go down Friday night, have dinner, and Steve would just
be promoting that everything is great. Then the second day, without
fail, he'd be kind of, 'Oh shit, is this thing going to sell, oh God, I have
to raise the price, I'm sorry I did that to you, and my team is a bunch
of idiots.'"

Gates sawJobs's reality distortion field atplay when the Xerox Star
was launched. At a joint team dinner one Friday night, Jobs asked
Gates how many Stars had been sold thus far. Gates said six hundred.

The next day, infront ofGates and the whole team,Jobs said that three

hundred Stars had been sold, forgetting that Gates had just told every
one itwas actually six hundred. "So his whole team starts looking atme

176

Walter Isaacson

like, Are you going to tell him that he's full ofshit?'" Gates recalled.
"And in that case I didn't take the bait." On another occasionJobs and

his team were visiting Microsoft and having dinner atthe Seattle Ten
nis Club. Jobs launched into a sermon about how the Macintosh and
its software would be so easy to use that there would be no manuals.
"Itwas like anybody who ever thought that there would be a manual
for any Mac application was the greatest idiot," said Gates. "And we
were like, 'Does he really mean it? Should we not tell him thatwe have
people who are actually working on manuals?'"
After a while the relationship became bumpier. The original plan
was to have some oftheMicrosoft applications—such as Excel, Chart,
and File—carry the Apple logo and come bundled with the purchase
ofaMacintosh. "We were going toget $10 per app, per machine," said

Gates. But this arrangement upset competing software makers. In ad
dition, it seemed that some ofMicrosoft's programs might be late. So
Jobs invoked a provision inhis deal with Microsoft and decided not to
bundle its software; Microsoft would have to scramble to distribute its
software asproducts sold directly to consumers.

Gates went along without much complaint. Hewas already getting
used to the fact that, as he put it, Jobs could "play fast and loose," and

he suspected that the unbundling would actually help Microsoft. "We
could make more money selling our software separately," Gates said.
"Itworks better that way ifyou're willing to think you're going to have
reasonable market share." Microsoft ended up making its software for

various other platforms, and it began to give priority to the IBM PC
version of Microsoft Word rather than the Macintosh version. In the

end, Jobs's decision toback out ofthe bundling deal hurt Apple more
than it did Microsoft.

When Excel for the Macintosh was released, Jobs and Gates un

veiled it together atapress dinner atNew York's Tavern on the Green.
Askedif Microsoft would make a version of it forIBM PCs, Gates did

not reveal the bargain he had made withJobs but merely answered that
"in time" that might happen. Jobs took the microphone. "I'm. sure 'in
time' we'll all be dead," he joked.

Gates andJobs

177

The Battle ofthe GUI
At that time, Microsoft was producing an operating system, known
as DOS, which it licensed to IBM and compatible computers. It was
based on an old-fashioned command line interface that confronted

users with surly little prompts such as C:\>. As Jobs and his team

began to work closely with Microsoft, they grew worried that it would
copy Macintosh's graphical user interface. Andy Hertzfeld noticed that
his contact at Microsoft was asking detailed questions about how the

Macintosh operating system worked. "Itold Steve thatI suspected that
Microsoft was going to clone the Mac," he recalled.

They were right to worry. Gates believed that graphical interfaces
were the future, and that Microsoft had just as much right as Apple
did to copy what had been developed at Xerox PARC. As he freely
admitted later, "We sort ofsay, 'Hey, we believe in graphics interfaces,
we saw the Xerox Alto too.'"

In their original deal, Jobs had convinced Gates to agree that Mi
crosoft would not create graphical software for anyone other than
Apple until a year after the Macintosh shipped inJanuary 1983. Un
fortunately for Apple, it did not provide for the possibility that the
Macintosh launch would bedelayed for ayear. SoGates was within his
rights when, in November 1983, he revealed that Microsoft planned

to develop a new operating system for IBM PCs featuring a graphical
interface with windows, icons, and a mouse for point-and-click navi
gation. It would be called Windows. Gates hosted aJobs-like product
announcement, the most lavish thus far in Microsoft's history, at the
HelmsleyPalace Hotel in New York.
Jobs was furious. He knew there was little he could do about it—

Microsoft's deal with Apple not to do competing graphical software
was running out—but he lashed out nonetheless. "Get Gates down

here immediately," he ordered Mike Boich, who was Apple's evange
list to other software companies. Gates arrived, alone and willing to
discuss things with Jobs. "He called me down to get pissed offat me,"
Gates recalled. "I went down to Cupertino, like a command perfor-

178

Walter Isaacson

mance. I told him, 'We're doing Windows.' I said to him, 'We're bet
ting our company on graphical interfaces.'"
They met in Jobs's conference room, where Gates found himself
surrounded by ten Apple employees who were eager to watch their
boss assail him. Jobs didn't disappoint his troops. "You're ripping us
off!" he shouted. "I trusted you, and now you're stealing from us!"
Hertzfeld recalled that Gates just satthere coolly, looking Steve in the

eye, before hurling back, in his squeaky voice, what became a classic
zinger. "Well, Steve, I think there's more than one way oflooking at it.
I think it's morelikewe both had this rich neighbor namedXerox and
I broke into his house to steal the TV set and found out that you had
already stolenit."
Gates's two-day visit provoked the full range of Jobs's emotional

responses and manipulation techniques. It also made clear that the
Apple-Microsoft symbiosis had become a scorpion dance, with both
sides circling warily, knowing that a sting byeither could cause prob
lems for both. After the confrontation in the conference room, Gates

quietly gave Jobs a private demo ofwhat was being planned for Win
dows. "Steve didn't know whatto say," Gates recalled. "He could either

say, 'Oh, this is a violation of something,' but he didn't. He chose to
say, 'Oh,it's actually really a piece ofshit.'" Gates was thrilled, because
it gave him a chance to calm Jobs down for a moment. "I said, 'Yes,
it's a nice little piece ofshit.'" So Jobs went through a gamut of other
emotions. "During thecourse ofthis meeting, he's justruder thanshit,"
Gates said. "And then there's a partwhere he's almost crying, like, 'Oh,
justgive me a chance to get this thing off.'" Gates responded bybe
coming very calm. "I'm good at when people are emotional, I'm kind
of less emotional."

As he often did when he wanted to have a serious conversation,

Jobs suggested they go on a long walk. They trekked the streets of
Cupertino, back and forth toDe Anza college, stopping at a diner and
thenwalking some more. "We had to take a walk, which is not one of
my management techniques," Gates said. "That was when he began
saying things like, 'Okay, okay, but don't make it too much like what
we're doing.'"

As it turned out, Microsoft wasn't able to get Windows 1.0 ready

Gates andJobs

179

for shipping until the fall of1985. Even then, itwas a shoddy product.
It lacked the elegance of the Macintosh interface, and it had tiled

windows rather than the magical clipping of overlapping windows
that Bill Atkinson had devised. Reviewers ridiculed it and consumers

spurned it. Nevertheless, as is often the case with Microsoft products,
persistence eventually made Windows better and then dominant.

Jobs never got over his anger. "They just ripped us offcompletely,
because Gates has no shame," Jobs told me almost thirty years later.
Upon hearing this, Gates responded, "Ifhe believes that, he really has
entered into one of his own reality distortion fields." In a legal sense,
Gates was right, as courts over the years have subsequently ruled. And
on a practical level, he had a strong case as well. Even though Apple
made a deal for the right to use what it saw at Xerox PARC, it was

inevitable thatother companies would develop similar graphical inter
faces. As Apple found out, the "look and feel" ofa computer interface
design is a hard thingto protect.

And yet Jobs's dismay was understandable. Apple had been more
innovative, imaginative, elegant in execution, and brilliant in design.
But even though Microsoft created acrudely copied series ofproducts,
it would end up winning the war ofoperating systems. This exposed
an aesthetic flaw in how the universe worked: The best and most in

novative products don't always win.A decade later, this truism caused

Jobs to let loose a rant that was somewhat arrogant and over-the-top,
butalso had awhiffoftruth toit."The only problem with Microsoft is
they justhave no taste, they have absolutely no taste," he said. "I don't
mean that in a small way. I mean that in a big way, in the sense that
they don't think of original ideas and they don't bring much culture
into their product."

CHAPTER

SEVENTEEN

ICARUS
What Goes Up . ..

Flying High
The launch of the Macintosh in January 1984 propelled Jobs into an

even higher orbit ofcelebrity, as was evident during a trip to Manhat
tan he took at the time. He wentto a party that Yoko Ono threwfor
her son, Sean Lennon, and gave the nine-year-old a Macintosh. The
boy loved it.The artists Andy Warhol and Keith Haring were there,
and they were so enthralled by what they could create with the ma
chine that the contemporary art world almost took an ominous turn.
"I drew a circle," Warhol exclaimed proudly after using QuickDraw.
Warhol insisted thatJobs take a computer to MickJagger. When Jobs
arrived at the rockstar's townhouse, Jagger seemed baffled. He didn't

quite know who Jobs was. Later Jobs told his team, "I think he was
on. drugs. Either that or he's brain-damaged." Jagger's daughter Jade,
however, took to the computer immediately and started drawing with
MacPaint, soJobs gave it to her instead.

He bought thetop-floor duplex apartment thathe'd shown Sculley
in the San Remo on Manhattan's Central Park West and hired James

Freed of I. M. Pei's firm to renovate it, but he never moved in. (He
would later sell it to Bono for $15 million.) He also bought an old
180

Icarus

181

Spanish colonial-style fourteen-bedroom mansion in Woodside, in the

hills above Palo Alto, that hadbeen built bya copper baron, which he
moved into but never got around to furnishing.
At Apple his status revived. Instead ofseeking ways to curtailJobs's
authority, Sculley gave him more: The Lisa and Macintosh divisions

were folded together, with Jobs in charge. He was flying high, but this
did not serve to make him more mellow. Indeed there was a memorable

display of his brutal honesty when he stood in front of the combined

Lisa and Macintosh teams to describe how they would be merged. His
Macintosh group leaders would get all of the top positions, he said,
and a quarter of the Lisa staff would be laid off. "You guys failed," he
said, looking directly at those who had worked on the Lisa. "You're a

B team. B players. Too many people here are B or C players, so today
we are releasing some of you to have the opportunity to work at our
sistercompanies here in the valley."

Bill Atkinson, who had worked onboth teams, thought it was not
only callous, but unfair. "These people had worked really hard and
were brilliant engineers," he said. But Jobs had latched onto what he

believed was a key management lesson from his Macintosh experi
ence: You have to be ruthless ifyou want to build a team ofA players.
"It's too easy, as a team grows, to put up with a few B players, and
they then attract a few more B players, and soon you will even have
some C players," he recalled. "The Macintosh experience taught me
that Aplayers like towork only with other Aplayers, which means you
can'tindulge B players."

Forthe time being, Jobs and Sculley were able to convince themselves
that their friendship was still strong. They professed their fondness so
effusively and often that they sounded like high school sweethearts
at a Hallmark card display. The first anniversary of Sculley s arrival
came in May 1984, and to celebrate Jobs lured him to a dinner party
at Le Mouton Noir, an elegant restaurant in the hills southwest of

Cupertino. To Sculley s surprise, Jobs had gathered the Apple board,
itstopmanagers, and even some East Coast investors. As they all con
gratulated him during cocktails, Sculley recalled, "a beaming Steve
stood in the background, nodding his head up and down and wearing

182

Walter Isaacson

a Cheshire Cat smile on hisface." Jobsbeganthe dinnerwith a fulsome

toast. "The happiest two days for me were when Macintosh shipped
andwhen John Sculley agreed to joinApple," he said. "This has been
the greatest year I've ever had in my whole life, because I've learned
so much from John." He then presented Sculley with a montage of
memorabiliafrom the year.

In response, Sculley effused about the joys of being Jobs's partner
for the past year, and he concluded with a line that, for different rea
sons, everyone at the table found memorable. "Apple has one leader,"
he said,"Steve and me." He looked across the room, caughtJobs's eye,
arid watched him smile. "It was as if we were communicating with

each other," Sculley recalled. But he also noticed that Arthur Rock
and some of the others were looking quizzical, perhaps even skeptical.
They were worried thatJobs was completely rolling him. They had
hired Sculley to controlJobs, and now itwas clear thatJobs was theone
in control. "Sculley was so eager for Steve's approval that hewas unable
to standup to him," Rock recalled.

KeepingJobs happy and deferring tohis expertise may have seemed
like a smart strategy to Sculley. Buthefailed to realize that it was not in
Jobs's nature to share control. Deference didnot come naturally to him.
He began to become more vocal about how he thought the company
should be run.At the 1984 business strategy meeting, for example, he

pushed to make the company's centralized sales and marketing staffs
bid on the right to provide their services to the various product divi
sions. (This wouldhave meant, for example, that the Macintoshgroup
could decide not to use Apple's marketing team andinstead create one
of its own.) No one else was in favor, but Jobs kept trying to ram it

through. "People were looking to me to take control, to gethim to sit
down and shut up, butI didn't," Sculley recalled. As themeeting broke
up, he heard someone whisper, "Why doesn't Sculley shut him up?"
When Jobs decided to build a state-of-the-art factory in Fremont
to manufacture the Macintosh, his aesthetic passions and controlling

nature kicked into high gear. He wanted the machinery to be painted
in bright hues, like the Apple logo, but he spent so much time going
over paint chips that Apple's manufacturing director, Matt Carter, fi
nally just installed them intheir usual beige and gray. When Jobs took

Icarus

183

a tour, he ordered that the machines be repainted in the bright colors
he wanted. Carter objected; this was precision equipment, and repaint
ing the machines could cause problems. Heturned outtoberight. One
ofthe most expensive machines, which gotpainted bright blue, ended
up notworking properly and was dubbed "Steve's folly." Finally Carter
quit. "It took so much energy to fight him, and it was usually over
something sopointless that finally I hadenough," he recalled.
Jobs tapped as a replacement Debi Coleman, the spunky butgoodnatured Macintosh financial officer who had once won the team's an

nual award for the person who best stood up to Jobs. But she knew
how to cater to his whims when necessary. When Apple's art director,

Clement Mok, informed her that Jobs wanted the walls to be pure
white, she protested, "You can't paint a factory pure white. There's
going to be dust and stuff all over." Mok replied, "There's no white

that's too white for Steve." She ended up going along. With its pure
white walls and its bright blue, yellow, and red machines, the factory
floor "looked like an Alexander Caldershowcase," said Coleman.
When asked about his obsessive concern over the look of the fac

tory, Jobs said it was a way to ensure a passion for perfection:
Fd gooutto thefactory, and Fd putonawhite glove tocheck for dust. Fd
find it everywhere—on machines, onthetops ofthe racks, on thefloor.
And Fd ask Debi to get it cleaned. I told her I thought we should be
able to eat offthe floor ofthe factory. Well, this drove Debi up the wall.
She didn't understand why. And I couldn't articulate it back then. See,

Fd been very influenced by what Fd seen inJapan. Part ofwhat I gready
admired there—and part of what we were lacking in our factory—
was a sense of teamwork and discipline. If we didn't have the disci

pline to keep thatplace spodess, then we weren't going to have the dis
cipline to keep allthese machines running.

One Sunday morningJobs brought his father to see the factory. Paul
Jobs had always been fastidious about making sure that his craftsman
ship was exacting and his tools inorder, and his son was proud toshow
thathecould do the same. Coleman came along togive thetour. "Steve
was, like, beaming," she recalled. "He was so proud to show his father

184

Walter Isaacson

this creation." Jobs explained how everything worked, and his father
seemed truly admiring. "He kept looking at his father, who touched
everything andloved how clean and perfect everything looked."
Things were not quite as sweet when Danielle Mitterrand toured
the factory. The Cuba-admiring wife of France's socialist president
Francis Mitterrand asked a lot of questions, through her translator,
about the working conditions, while Jobs, who had grabbed Alain
Rossmann to serve ashistranslator, kepttrying to explain the advanced
robotics and technology. AfterJobs talked aboutthe just-in-time pro
duction schedules, she asked about overtime pay. He was annoyed, so
he described how automation helped him keep down labor costs, a
subject he knew would not delight her. "Is it hard work?" she asked.
"Howmuch vacation time do theyget?" Jobs couldn't contain himself.
"If she's so interested in their welfare," he said to her translator, "tell

her she cancome work here any time." The translator turned pale and
said nothing. After a moment Rossmann stepped in to say, in French,
"M. Jobs says he thanks you for your visit and your interest in the
factory." Neither Jobs nor Madame Mitterrand knew what happened,
Rossmann recalled, but her translator looked veryrelieved.

Afterward, as he sped his Mercedes down the freeway toward
Cupertino, Jobs fumed to Rossmann about Madame Mitterrand's at
titude. At one pointhewas going justover 100 miles perhourwhen a
policeman stopped him and began writing a ticket. After a few min
utes, as the officer scribbled away, Jobs honked. "Excuse me?" the po
liceman said.Jobs replied, "I'm in ahurry." Amazingly, theofficer didn't

getmad. He simply finished writing the ticket and warned thatifJobs
was caught going over 55 again hewould besent tojail. As soon as the
policeman left, Jobs got back on the road and accelerated to 100. "He
absolutely believed that the normal rules didn't apply to him," Ross
mann marveled.

His wife, Joanna Hoffman, saw the same thingwhensheaccompa

nied Jobs to Europe a few months after theMacintosh was launched.
"He was just completely obnoxious and thinking he could get away
with anything," she recalled. In Paris she had arranged a formal dinner
with French software developers, butJobs suddenly decided he didn't
want to go. Instead he shut the car door on Hoffman and told her he

Icarus

185

was going to see the poster artist Folon instead. "The developers were
so pissed off they wouldn't shake our hands," she said.
In Italy, he took an instant dislike to Apple's general manager, a soft
rotund guy who had come from a conventional business. Jobs told him
bluntly that he was not impressed with his team or his sales strategy.
"You don't deserve to be able to sell the Mac," Jobs said coldly. But
that was mild compared to his reaction to the restaurant the hapless
managerhad chosen. Jobs demanded a vegan meal, but the waitervery
elaborately proceeded to dish out a sauce filled with sour cream.Jobs
got so nasty that Hoffman had to threaten him. She whispered that if
he didn't calm down, she wasgoing to pour her hot coffee on his lap.
The most substantive disagreements Jobs had on the Europeantrip
concerned sales forecasts. Using his reality distortion field, Jobs was
always pushing his team to come up with higher projections. He kept
threateningthe Europeanmanagers that he wouldn't give them anyal
locations unless they projected biggerforecasts. They insistedon being
realistic, and Hoffmann had to referee. "By the end of the trip, my
whole bodywas shakinguncontrollably," Hoffman recalled.
It was on this trip that Jobs first got to know Jean-Louis Gassee,
Apple's manager in France. Gassee was among the few to stand up
successfully to Jobs on the trip. "He has his own waywith the truth,"
Gassee later remarked. "The only way to deal with him was to outbully him." When Jobs made his usual threat about cutting down on
France's allocations if Gassee didn't jack up sales projections, Gassee
got angry. "I remember grabbing his lapeland telling him to stop, and
then he backed down. I used to be an angryman myself. I am a recov
ering assaholic. So I couldrecognize that in Steve."
Gassee was impressed, however, at how Jobs could turn on the
charm when he wanted to. Francis Mitterrand had been preaching
the gospel of informatique pour tous—computing for all—and various
academic experts in technology, such as Marvin Minsky and Nicholas
Negroponte, came over to sing in the choir. Jobs gave a talk to the
group at the Hotel Bristol and painted a picture of how France could
move ahead if it put computers in allof its schools. Paris also brought

outthe romantic in him. Both Gassee and Negroponte tell tales ofhim
pining over women while there.

186

Walter Isaacson

Falling
After the burst of excitement that accompanied the release of Mac
intosh, its sales began to taper off in the second half of 1984. The
problem was a fundamental one: It was a dazzling but woefully slow
and underpowered computer, and no amount of hoopla could mask
that. Its beautywas that its userinterface looked likea sunnyplayroom
rather than a somberdarkscreen with sickly greenpulsatingletters and
surlycommand lines.But that led to its greatestweakness: A character
on a text-based display took less than a byte of code, whereas when
the Mac drew a letter, pixel by pixel in anyelegantfont youwanted, it
required twenty or thirty times more memory. The Lisa handled this
by shipping with more than 1,000K RAM, whereas the Macintosh
made do with 128K.

Another problem was the lack of an internal hard disk drive. Jobs
had called Joanna Hoffman a "Xerox bigot"when she fought for such
a storage device. He insisted that the Macintosh have just one floppy
disk drive. If you wanted to copy data, you could end up with a new
form of tennis elbow from having to swap floppy disks in and out of
the single drive. In addition, the Macintosh lacked a fan, another ex
ample of Jobs's dogmatic stubbornness. Fans, he felt, detracted from
the calm of a computer. This caused many component failures and
earned the Macintosh the nickname "the beigetoaster," which did not
enhance its popularity. It was so seductive that it had sold well enough
for the first few months, but when people became more aware of its
limitations, sales fell. As Hoffmanlater lamented, "The reality distor
tion field can serve as a spur, but then realityitself hits."
At the end of 1984,with Lisa sales virtuallynonexistent and Mac
intosh sales falling below ten thousand a month, Jobs made a shoddy,
and atypical, decision out of desperation. He decidedto take the inven
tory of unsold Lisas, graft on a Macintosh-emulationprogram,and sell
them as a new product, the "MacintoshXL." Since the Lisa had been
discontinued and would not be restarted, it was an unusual instance

of Jobs producing something that he did not believe in. "I was furious
because the Mac XL wasn't real," said Hoffman. "It was just to blow

Icarus

187

the excess Lisas out the door. It sold well, and then we had to discon

tinue the horrible hoax, so I resigned."

The darkmoodwas evident in the ad that was developed inJanuary
1985, which was supposed to reprise the anti-IBM sentiment of the
resonant"1984" ad. Unfortunately therewas a fundamental difference:
The first ad had endedon a heroic, optimistic note, but the storyboards
presented by Lee Clow and Jay Chiat for the new ad, titled "Lem
mings," showed dark-suited, blindfolded corporate managers march
ing off a cliffto their death.Fromthe beginning bothJobs and Sculley
were uneasy. It didn't seem as if it would convey a positive or glorious
image of Apple, but instead would merely insult every manager who
had bought an IBM.
Jobs and Sculley asked for other ideas, but the agency folks pushed
back. "You guys didn't want to run 1984' last year," one of them said.

According to Sculley, Lee Clow added, "I will put my whole reputa
tion, everything, on this commercial." When the filmed version, done
by Ridley Scott's brotherTony, came in, the concept looked even worse.
The mindless managers marching off the cliffwere singing a fiineralpaced version of the Snow White song "Heigh-ho, Heigh-ho," and the
dreary filmmaking made it even more depressing than the storyboards
portended. "I can't believe you're going to insult businesspeople across
America by running that," Debi Coleman yelled at Jobs when she saw
the ad. At the marketing meetings, she stood up to make herpointabout
howmuch she hated it. "I literally put a resignation letteron his desk. I
wrote it on my Mac. I thought it was an affront to corporate managers.
We were just beginning to get a toehold with desktop publishing."
Nevertheless Jobs and Sculley bent to the agency's entreaties and
ran the commercial during the Super Bowl. They went to the game
together at Stanford Stadium with Sculley s wife, Leezy (who couldn't
stand Jobs), and Jobs's new girlfriend, Tina Redse. When the com
mercial was shown nearthe end of the fourth quarter of a dreary game,
the fans watched on the overhead screen and had little reaction. Across

the country, most of the response was negative. "It insulted the very
people Apple was trying to reach," the president of a market research
firm toldFortune. Apple's marketing manager suggested afterward that
the company mightwantto buyan adin the Wall StreetJournal apolo-

188

Walter Isaacson

gizing. Jay Chiat threatened that if Apple did that his agency would
buy the facing page and apologize for the apology.
Jobs's discomfort, with both the ad and the situation at Apple in
general, was on display when he traveled to New York in January to
do another round of one-on-one press interviews. Andy Cunning
ham, from Regis McKenna's firm, was in charge of hand-holding and
logistics at the Carlyle. When Jobs arrived, he told her that his suite
needed to be completely redone, even though it was 10 p.m. and the
meetings were to begin the next day. The piano was not in the right
place; the strawberries were the wrong type. But his biggest objection
was that he didn't like the flowers. He wanted callalilies. "We got into
a big fight on what a callalilyis,"Cunningham recalled. "I know what
they are, because I had them at my wedding, but he insisted on hav
ing a different type of lily and said I was'stupid' because I didn't know
what a real calla lily was." So Cunningham went out and, this being
New York, was able to find a place open at midnight where she could
get the lilies he wanted. By the time they got the room rearranged,
Jobs started objecting to what she was wearing. "That suit's disgust
ing," he told her. Cunningham knew that at times he just simmered
with undirected anger, so she tried to calm him down. "Look, I know
you're angry, and I know how you feel," she said.
"You have no fucking idea how I feel," he shot back, "no fucking
idea what it's like to be me."

Thirty Years Old
Turning thirty is a milestone for most people, especially those of the
generation that proclaimed it would never trust anyone over that age.
To celebrate his own thirtieth, in February 1985, Jobs threw a lav
ishlyformal but also playful—black tie and tennis shoes—party for one
thousand in the ballroom of the St. Francis Hotel in San Francisco.

The invitation read, "There's an old Hindu saying that goes, In the
first 30 years of your life,you makeyour habits. For the last 30 years of
your life,your habits make you.' Come help me celebratemine."
One table featured software moguls, including Bill Gates and

Icarus

189

Mitch Kapor. Another had old friends such as Elizabeth Holmes, who
brought as her date a woman dressed in a tuxedo. Andy Hertzfeld and
Burrell Smith had rented tuxes and wore floppy tennis shoes, which
made it all the more memorable when they danced to the Strauss
waltzes played by the San Francisco Symphony Orchestra.
Ella Fitzgerald provided the entertainment, as Bob Dylan had de
clined. She sang mainly from her standard repertoire, though occa
sionally tailoring a songlike"The Girl from Ipanema" to be about the
boy from Cupertino. When she asked for some requests, Jobs called
out a few. She concluded with a slow rendition of "Happy Birthday."
Sculley came to the stage to propose a toast to "technology's fore
most visionary." Wozniak also came up and presented Jobs with a

framed copy of the Zaltairhoax from the 1977West Coast Computer
Faire, where the Apple II had been introduced. The venture capitalist
Don Valentine marveled at the change in the decade since that time.
"He went from being a Ho Chi Minh look-alike, who said nevertrust
anyone over thirty, to a person who gives himself a fabulous thirtieth
birthdaywith Ella Fitzgerald," he said.
Many people had picked out special gifts for a personwho was not
easy to shop for. Debi Coleman, for example, found a first edition of
F. Scott Fitzgerald's The Last Tycoon. But Jobs, in an act that was odd
yet not out of character, left all of the gifts in a hotel room. Wozniak
and some of the Apple veterans, who did not take to the goat cheese
and salmon mousse that was served, met after the party and went out
to eat at a Denny's.

"It's rarethat yousee an artistin his30sor 40sable to really contrib
ute somethingamazing," Jobs saidwistfully to the writer David Sheff,
who published a long and intimate interview in Playboy the month he
turned thirty. "Of course, there are some people who are innately curi
ous, forever little kids in their awe of life, but they're rare."The inter
view touched on many subjects, but Jobs's most poignant ruminations
were about growing old and facing the future:
Your thoughts construct patterns like scaffolding in yourmind.You are
really etchingchemical patterns.In most cases, people get stuckin those
patterns,just like grooves in a record, and they neverget out of them.

190

Walter Isaacson

I'll always stay connected with Apple. I hope that throughout my
lifeI'll sort of have the threadof mylifeand the thread of Appleweave
in and out of eachother, likea tapestry. There maybe a fewyears when
Fm not there, but I'll always comeback
Ifyouwant to liveyourlife in a creative way, as an artist, you have to
not look back too much.You haveto be willingto take whateveryouVe
done and whoever youwere and throw them away.
The more the outside world tries to reinforce an image of you, the
harder it is to continue to be an artist, which is why a lot of times,
artists have to say, "Bye. I have to go. Fm going crazy and Fm getting
out of here." And they go and hibernate somewhere. Maybe later they
re-emerge a litde differendy.

With each of those statements, Jobs seemed to have a premonition
that his life would soon be changing. Perhaps the thread of his life
wouldindeedweave in and out of the thread of Apple's. Perhaps it was
time to throw away some of what he had been. Perhaps it was time to
say"Bye, I haveto go," and then reemerge later, thinking differently.

Exodus

Andy Hertzfeld had taken a leave of absence after the Macintosh came
out in 1984.He needed to recharge his batteries and get away from his
supervisor, Bob Belleville, whom he didn't like. One day he learned
that Jobs had given out bonuses of up to $50,000 to engineers on the
Macintosh team. So he went toJobs to askfor one.Jobs responded that
Belleville had decided not to give the bonuses to people who were on
leave. Hertzfeld later heard that the decision had actually been made
byJobs, so he confronted him. At firstJobs equivocated, then he said,
"Well,let's assume what you are saying is true. How does that change
things?" Hertzfeld said that if Jobs was withholding the bonus as a
reason for him to come back, then he wouldn't come back as a matter

of principle.Jobs relented, but it left Hertzfeld with a bad taste.
When his leave was coming to an end, Hertzfeld made an ap-

Icarus

191

pointment to have dinner with Jobs, and they walked from his office
to an Italian restaurant a few blocks away. "I really want to return,"
he told Jobs. "But things seem really messed up right now." Jobs was
vaguely annoyed and distracted, but Hertzfeld plunged ahead. "The
software team is completely demoralized and has hardly done a thing
for months, and Burrell is so frustrated that he won't last to the end of

the year."

At that pointJobs cut him off. "You don'tknow whatyou're talking
about!" he said. "The Macintosh team is doing great, and I'm having
the best time of myliferight now. You're just completely out of touch."
His starewaswithering, but he alsotried to look amused at Hertzfeld's
assessment.

"If you really believe that, I don't think there's anyway that I can
come back," Hertzfeld replied glumly. "The Mac team that I want to
comeback to doesn'tevenexist anymore."
"The Mac team had to grow up, and so do you," Jobs replied. "I
want you to come back, but if you don'twant to, that's up to you. You
don't matter as much asyou thinkyoudo, anyway."
Hertzfeld didn't come back.

By early 1985 Burrell Smith was also ready to leave. He had wor
ried that it would be hard to quit if Jobs tried to talk him out of it;
the reality distortion field was usually too strong for him to resist. So
he plotted with Hertzfeld how he could break free of it. "I've got it!"
he told Hertzfeld one day. "I know the perfect way to quit that will
nullify the reality distortion field. I'll just walk into Steve's office, pull
down my pants, and urinate on his desk. What could he say to that?
It's guaranteed to work." The betting on the Mac team was that even
brave Burrell Smith would not have the gumption to do that. When
he finally decided he had to make his break, around the time ofJobs's
birthdaybash, he made an appointment to see Jobs. He was surprised
to find Jobs smiling broadly when he walked in."Are you gonnado it?
Areyou really gonna do it?" Jobs asked. He had heard about the plan.

Smith looked at him. "DoI have to? I'll doit ifI have to."Jobs gave
him a look, and Smith decided it wasn't necessary. So he resigned less
dramatically and walked out on goodterms.

192

Walter Isaacson

He was quickly followed by another of the great Macintosh en
gineers, Bruce Horn. When Horn went in to say good-bye,Jobs told
him, "Everything that's wrong with the Mac is your fault."
Horn responded, "Well, actually, Steve, a lot of things that are right
with the Mac are my fault, and I had to fight like crazy to get those
things in."
"You're right," admitted Jobs. "I'll give you 15,000 shares to stay."
When Horn declined the offer,Jobs showed his warmer side. "Well,

give me a hug,"he said. And so they hugged.
But the biggest news that month was the departure from Apple,
yet again, of its cofounder, Steve Wozniak. Wozniak was then quietly
working as a midlevel engineer in the Apple II division, serving as a
humble mascot of the roots of the company and staying as far away
from management and corporate politics as he could. He felt, with
justification, that Jobs was not appreciative of the Apple II, which re
mained the cash cowof the company and accounted for 70%of its sales
at Christmas 1984."People in the Apple II group were being treated
as very unimportant by the rest of the company," he later said. "This
was despite the fact that the Apple II was by far the largest-selling
productin our company for ages, and wouldbe for years to come." He
evenroused himselfto do somethingout of character; he picked up the
phone one day and called Sculley, berating him for lavishing so much
attention on Jobs and the Macintosh division.
Frustrated, Wozniak decided to leave quietly to start a new com
pany that would make a universal remote control device he had in
vented. It would control your television, stereo, and other electronic
devices with a simple set of buttons that you could easily program.
He informed the head of engineering at the Apple II division, but he
didn't feel he was important enough to go out of channels and tellJobs
or Markkula. So Jobs first heard about it when the news leaked in the

Wall StreetJournal. In his earnestway, Wozniak had openly answered
the reporter's questions when he called. Yes, he said, he felt that Apple
had been givingshort shrift to the Apple II division. "Apple's direction
has been horrendously wrong for five years," he said.
Less than two weeks later Wozniak and Jobs traveled together to
the White House, where Ronald Reagan presented them with the

Icarus

193

first NationalMedal ofTechnology. The presidentquoted what Presi
dent Rutherford Hayes had said when first shown a telephone—"An
amazing invention, but who would ever want to use one?"—and then
quipped, "I thought at the time that he might be mistaken." Because
of the awkward situation surrounding Wozniak's departure, Apple did
not throw a celebratory dinner. So Jobs and Wozniak went for a walk
afterward and.ate at a sandwich shop. They chatted amiably, Wozniak
recalled, and avoided anydiscussion of their disagreements.
Wozniak wanted to make the parting amicable. It was his style. So
he agreed to stay on as a part-time Apple employee at a $20,000 sal
ary and represent the company at events and trade shows. That could
have been a graceful way to drift apart. But Jobs could not leave well
enoughalone. One Saturday, a fewweeks after they had visited Wash
ington together, Jobs went to the new Palo Alto studios of Hartmut
Esslinger, whose company frogdesign had moved there to handle its
design work for Apple. There he happened to see sketches that the
firm had made for Wozniak's new remote control device, and he flew

into a rage. Apple had a clause in its contract that gave it the right to
bar frogdesign from working on other computer-related projects, and
Jobs invoked it. "I informed them," he recalled, "that working with
Woz wouldn'tbe acceptable to us."
When the Wall StreetJournalheard what happened, it got in touch
with Wozniak, who, as usual, was open and honest. He said that Jobs
was punishing him. "Steve Jobs has a hate for me, probably because
of the things I said about Apple," he told the reporter. Jobs's action
was remarkably petty, but it was also partly caused by the fact that he
understood, in ways that others did not, that the look and style of a
product servedto brand it. A device that had Wozniak's name on it and

used the same design language as Apple's products might be mistaken
for something that Apple had produced. "It's not personal," Jobs told
the newspaper, explaining that he wantedto make surethat Wozniak's
remote wouldn't looklike something made by Apple. "We don'twant
to see our design language usedon other products. Woz has to find his
own resources. He can't leverage off Apple's resources; we can't treat
him specially."
Jobs volunteered to pay for the work that frogdesign had already

194

Walter Isaacson

done for Wozniak, but even so the executives at the firm were taken

aback. When Jobs demandedthat they send him the drawings done for
Wozniak or destroy them, they refused. Jobs had to send them a letter
invokingApple's contractual right. Herbert Pfeifer, the design director
of the firm, riskedJobs's wrath bypublicly dismissing his claimthat the
disputewith Wozniakwasnot personal. "It's a powerplay," Pfeifertold
the Journal. "They havepersonal problems between them."
Hertzfeld was outraged when he heard what Jobs had done. He
lived about twelve blocks from Jobs, who sometimes would drop by
on his walks. "I got so furious about the Wozniakremote episode that
when Steve next came over, I wouldn't let him in the house," Hertz

feld recalled. "He knew he waswrong, but he tried to rationalize, and
maybe in his distorted realityhe was able to."Wozniak, always a teddy
bear evenwhen annoyed, hired another designfirm and even agreedto
stayon Apple's retainer as a spokesman.

Showdown, Spring 1985
There were many reasons for the rift between Jobs and Sculley in
the spring of 1985. Some were merely business disagreements, such
as Sculley's attempt to maximize profits by keeping the Macintosh
price high whenJobs wanted to makeit more affordable. Others were
weirdly psychological and stemmed from the torrid and unlikely infat
uation they initially had with each other. Sculley had painfully craved
Jobs's affection, Jobs had eagerly sought a father figure and mentor,
and when the ardor began to cool there was an emotional backwash.
But at its core, the growing breach had two fundamental causes, one
on each side.

ForJobs,the problem was that Sculley never became a productper
son.He didn't make the effort, or showthe capacity, to understandthe
fine points of what theywere making. On the contrary, he foundJobs's
passion for tinytechnical tweaks and design details to be obsessive and
counterproductive. He had spent his career selling sodas and snacks
whose recipes were largely irrelevant to him. He wasn't naturally pas-

Icarus

195

sionate about products, whichwas among the most damning sins that
Jobs could imagine. "I tried to educate him about the details of engi
neering," Jobs recalled, "but he had no idea how products are created,
and after a while it just turned into arguments. But I learned that my
perspective was right. Products are everything." He came to seeSculley
as clueless, and his contempt was exacerbated by Sculley's hunger for
his affection and delusions that theywere verysimilar.
For Sculley, the problem was that Jobs, when he was no longer in
courtship or manipulative mode, was frequently obnoxious, rude, self
ish, and nasty to other people. He found Jobs's boorish behavior as
despicable as Jobs found Sculley's lack of passion for product details.
Sculley was kind, caring, and polite to a fault. At one point theywere
planning to meet withXerox's vice chair Bill Glavin, andSculleybegged
Jobs to behave. But as soon as they sat down, Jobs told Glavin, "You
guys don't have any clue whatyou're doing," andthe meeting broke up.
"I'm sorry, but I couldn't help myself," Jobs told Sculley. It was one of
many suchcases. As Atari's Al Alcorn laterobserved, "Sculley believed
in keeping people happy andworrying about relationships. Steve didn't
give a shit aboutthat. But he did care about the product in a way that
Sculley never could, and he was able to avoid having too many bozos
working at Apple byinsulting anyone who wasn't an A player."

The board became increasingly alarmed at the turmoil, andin early
1985 Arthur Rock and some other disgruntled directors delivered a
stern lecture to both. They told Sculley that he was supposed to be
runningthe company, and he should start doingso with more author
ity and less eagerness to be pals withJobs. They toldJobs that he was
supposed to be fixing the mess at the Macintosh division and not tell
ing other divisions howto do theirjob. Afterward Jobs retreated to his
office and typed on his Macintosh,"I will not criticize the rest of the
organization, I will not criticize the rest of the organization ..."
As the Macintosh continued to disappoint—sales in March 1985

were only 10% ofthe budget forecast—Jobs holed up in hisoffice fum
ing or wandered the halls berating everyone else for the problems. His
mood swings becameworse, and so did his abuse of those around him.

Middle-level managers began to rise up against him. The marketing

196

Walter Isaacson

chief Mike Murray sought a private meeting with Sculley at an in
dustry conference. As theywere goingup to Sculley's hotel room,Jobs
spotted them and asked to come along. Murray asked him not to. He
told Sculley that Jobs waswreaking havoc and had to be removed from
managing the Macintosh division. Sculley replied that he was not yet
resigned to having a showdown with Jobs. Murray later sent a memo
directly to Jobs criticizing the way he treatedcolleagues and denounc
ing "management by character assassination."
For a few weeks it seemed as if there might be a solution to the
turmoil. Jobs became fascinated by a flat-screen technology developed
by a firm near Palo Alto called Woodside Design, run by an eccen

tric engineer named Steve Kitchen. He also was impressed by another
startup that made a touchscreen display that could be controlled by
your finger, soyou didn'tneed a mouse. Together these might helpful
fill Jobs's vision of creating a "Macin a book." On a walkwith Kitchen,
Jobs spotted a building in nearby Menlo Park and declared that they
should open a skunkworks facility to workon these ideas. It could be
called AppleLabs andJobs could run it, goingbackto the joyof having
a small team and developing a great newproduct.
Sculley was thrilled by the possibility. It would solve most of his
management issues, moving Jobs back to what he did best and get
ting rid of his disruptive presence in Cupertino. Sculley also had a
candidate to replace Jobs as manager of the Macintosh division: JeanLouis Gassee, Apple's chiefin France, whohad suffered throughJobs's
visit there. Gassee flew to Cupertino and said he would take the job
if he got a guarantee that he would run the division rather than work
under Jobs. One of the board members, Phil Schlein of Macy's, tried
to convince Jobs that he wouldbe better off thinking up new products
and inspiring a passionate little team.
But after some reflection, Jobs decided that was not the path he
wanted. He declined to cede controlto Gassee, who wisely went back
to Paris to avoid the power clash that was becoming inevitable. For the
rest of the spring, Jobs vacillated. There were times when he wanted
to assert himself as a corporate manager, evenwriting a memo urging
costsavings by eliminating free beverages and first-class air travel, and

Icarus

197

other times when he agreed with those who were encouraging him to
go off and run a newAppleLabs R&D group.
In March Murray let loose with another memo that he marked

"Do not circulate" but gave to multiple colleagues. "In my three years
at Apple, I've never observed so much confusion, fear, and dysfunc
tion as in the past 90 days," he began. "We are perceived by the rank
and file as a boatwithout a rudder, drifting away into foggy oblivion."
Murray hadbeen onboth sides ofthefence; at times he conspired with
Jobs to undermine Sculley, but in this memo he laid the blame on Jobs.
"Whether the cause of ox because 0/* the dysfunction, Steve Jobs now
controls a seemingly impenetrable power base."
At the end of that month, Sculley finally worked up the nerve to
tell Jobs that he should give up running the Macintosh division. He
walked over to Jobs's office one evening and brought the human re
sources manager, Jay Elliot, to make the confrontation more formal.

"There is no one who admires your brilliance and vision more than I
do," Sculley began. He had uttered suchflatteries before, but this time
it was clear that there would be a brutal "but" punctuating the thought.
And there was. "Butthis is really not going to work," he declared. The
flatteries punctured by "buts" continued. "We have developed a great
friendship witheach other," he said, "butI have lostconfidence in your
ability to run the Macintosh division." He also beratedJobs for badmouthing him as a bozo behind his back.
Jobs looked stunned and countered with an odd challenge, that

Sculley should help and coach him more: "You've got to spend more
time with me." Then he lashed back. He toldSculley he knew nothing
about computers, was doing a terrible job running the company, and
had disappointed Jobs ever since coming to Apple. Then he began to
cry. Sculley sat there biting hisfingernails.
"I'm goingto bring this up with the board," Sculley declared. "I'm
going to recommend that you step down from your operating position
ofrunning theMacintosh division. I want you to know that." He urged
Jobs not to resist andto agree instead to work on developing new tech
nologies and products.

Jobs jumped from his seat and turned his intense stare on Sculley.

198

Walter Isaacson

"I don't believe you're goingto do that," he said. "If you do that, you're
going to destroy the company."
Over the next few weeks Jobs's behavior fluctuated wildly. At one
moment he wouldbe talkingaboutgoingoff to run AppleLabs, but in
the next moment he wouldbe enlistingsupport to have Sculley ousted.
He would reach out to Sculley, then lash out at him behind his back,
sometimes on the same night.One night at 9 he called Apple's general
counsel Al Eisenstat to say he was losing confidence in Sculley and
needed his help convincing the boardto fire him; at 11 the same night,
he phoned Sculley to say, "You're terrific, and I just want you to know
I love workingwith you."
At the board meeting on April 11, Sculley officially reported that
he wanted to askJobs to step down as the head of the Macintosh divi
sion and focus instead on newproduct development. Arthur Rock, the
most crusty and independent of the board members, then spoke. He
was fed up with both of them: with Sculley for not having the guts to
take command overthe pastyear, and withJobs for "acting like a petu
lant brat."The board needed to get this dispute behind them, and to
do so it should meet privately with eachof them.
Sculley left the room so that Jobs could present first. Jobs insisted
that Sculley was the problem because he had no understanding of com

puters. Rock responded byberatingJobs. In his growling voice, he said
that Jobs had been behaving foolishly for a year and had no right to
be managing a division. Even Jobs's strongest supporter, Phil Schlein,
tried to talkhim into stepping aside gracefully to run a research lab for
the company.

When it was Sculley's turn to meet privately with the board, he
gave an ultimatum: "You can back me, and then I take responsibility
for running the company, or we can do nothing, and you're going to
have to find yourselves a new CEO." If given the authority, he said,
he would not move abruptly, but would ease Jobs into the new role
over the next few months. The board unanimously sided with Scul
ley. He was given the authority to remove Jobs whenever he felt the
timing was right. AsJobs waited outside the boardroom, knowing full
well that he was losing, he saw DelYocam, a longtime colleague, and
hugged him.

Icarus

199

After the board made its decision, Sculley tried to be conciliatory.
Jobs asked that the transition occur slowly, over the next few months,
and Sculley agreed. Later that evening Sculley's executive assistant,
Nanette Buckhout, called Jobs to see howhe was doing. He wasstillin
his office, shell-shocked. Sculley had already left, andJobs came over
to talk to her. Once again he began oscillating wildly in his attitude
toward Sculley. "Why didJohn do this to me?" he said. "He betrayed
me." Then he swung the otherway. Perhaps he should take some time
away to workon restoring his relationship with Sculley, he said. "John's
friendship is more important than anything else, and I think maybe
that's whatI should do, concentrate on ourfriendship."

Plotting a Coup
Jobs was not good at taking no for an answer. He went to Sculley's
office in early May 1985 and asked for more time to show that he
could manage the Macintosh division. He would prove himself as an
operations guy, he promised. Sculley didn't back down. Jobs next tried
a direct challenge: He asked Sculley to resign. "I thinkyou really lost
your stride," Jobs told him. "You were really great the first year, and
everything went wonderful. But something happened." Sculley, who
generally was even-tempered, lashed back, pointing out that Jobs had
been unable to get Macintosh software developed, come up with new
models, or win customers. The meeting degenerated into a shouting
match aboutwhowas the worse manager. AfterJobs stalked out, Scul
leyturned away from the glass wall of his office, where othershad been
looking in on the meeting, andwept.
Matters began to come to a head on Tuesday, May 14, when the
Macintosh team made its quarterly review presentation to Sculley and
other Apple corporate leaders. Jobs still had not relinquished control

of the division, and he was defiant when he arrived in the corporate
boardroom with his team. He and Sculley began byclashing over what
the division's missionwas.Jobs said it was to sell more Macintosh ma

chines. Sculley said it was to serve theinterests of the Apple company
as a whole. As usual there was little cooperation among the divisions;

200

Walter Isaacson

for one thing, the Macintosh team was planning new disk drives that
were different from those being developed by the Apple II division.
The debate, according to the minutes, took a full hour.
Jobs then described the projects under way: a more powerful Mac,
which would take the place of the discontinued Lisa; and software
called FileServer, which would allow Macintosh users to share files on

a network. Sculley learned for the first time that these projects were
going to be late. He gave a cold critique of Murray's marketing record,
Belleville's missed engineering deadlines, and Jobs's overall manage
ment. Despite all this,Jobs ended the meetingwith a plea to Sculley, in
front of all the others there, to be given one more chance to prove he
could run a division. Sculley refused.
That night Jobs took his Macintosh team out to dinner at Nina's
Cafe in Woodside. Jean-Louis Gassee was in town because Sculley
wanted him to prepare to take over the Macintosh division, and Jobs
invited him to join them. Belleville proposed a toast "to those of us
who really understand what the world according to SteveJobs is all
about." That phrase—"the world according to Steve"—had been used
dismissively by others at Apple who belittled the realitywarp he cre
ated. After the others left, Belleville sat with Jobs in his Mercedes and

urged him to organize a battle to the death with Sculley.
Months earlier, Apple had gotten the right to export computers to
China, and Jobs had been invited to sign a deal in the Great Hall of
the People over the 1985 Memorial Dayweekend. He had told Sculley,
who decided he wanted to go himself, which was just fine with Jobs.
Jobs decided to use Sculley's absence to execute his coup. Throughout
the weekleading up to Memorial Day, he took a lot of people on walks
to sharehis plans. "I'm goingto launch a coupwhileJohn is in China,"
he told Mike Murray.

Seven Days in May
Thursday, May 23:At his regular Thursday meeting with his top lieu
tenants in the Macintosh division, Jobs told his inner circle about his

planto oust Sculley. He also confided in the corporate human resources

Icarus

201

director, Jay Elliot, who told him bluntly that the proposed rebellion
wouldn't work. Elliot had talked to some board members and urged
them to stand up for Jobs, but he discovered that most of the board
was with Sculley, as were most members of Apple's senior staff. Yet

Jobs barreled ahead. He even revealed his plans to Gassee on a walk
around the parking lot, despite the fact that Gassee had come from

Paris totake his job. "I made the mistake oftelling Gassee,"Jobs wryly
concededyears later.

That evening Apple's general counsel Al Eisenstat had a small bar
becue at his home for Sculley, Gassee, and theirwives. When Gassee
told Eisenstat what Jobs was plotting, he recommended that Gassee

inform Sculley. "Steve was trying to raise a cabal and have a coup to
get rid ofJolin," Gassee recalled. "In the den of Al Eisenstat's house,

I put my index finger lightly onJohn's breastbone and said, Ifyou leave
tomorrow for China, you could be ousted. Steve's plotting to get rid
ofyou.'"

Friday, May 24: Sculley canceled his trip and decided to confront Jobs
at the executive staff meeting on Friday morning. Jobs arrived late,
and he saw that his usual seat next to Sculley, who sat at the head of
the table, was taken. He sat instead at the far end. He was dressed in

awell-tailored suit and looked energized. Sculley looked pale. He an
nounced that hewas dispensing with the agenda to confront the issue
oneveryone's mind. "It's come to my attention thatyou'd like to throw
me out of the company," he said, looking directly atJobs. "I'd like to
ask you if that's true."

Jobs was not expecting this. But he was never shy about indulging
in brutal honesty. His eyes narrowed, and he fixed Sculley with his
unblinking stare. "I think you're bad for Apple, and I think you're the
wrong person to run the company," he replied, coldly and slowly. "You

really should leave this company. You don't know how to operate and
never have." He accused Sculley ofnot understanding the product de
velopment process, and then he added aself-centered swipe: "Iwanted
you here to help me grow, and you've been ineffective in helping me."
As the rest ofthe room sat frozen, Sculley finally lost his temper.
A childhood stutter that had not afflicted him for twenty years started

202

Walter Isaacson

to return. "I don't trust you, and I won't tolerate a lack of trust," he
stammered. When Jobs claimed that he would be better than Sculley
at running the company, Sculley took a gamble. He decided to poll
the room on that question. "He pulled offthis clever maneuver," Jobs
recalled, still smarting thirty-five years later. "It was at the executive
committee meeting, and hesaid, It's me or Steve, who doyou vote for?'
He setthe whole thing up so that you'd kind of have to be an idiotto
vote for me."

Suddenly the frozen onlookers began to squirm. Del Yocam had to
go first. He said he loved Jobs, wanted him to continue to play some
role in the company, but he worked up the nerve to conclude, with
Jobs staring at him, thathe"respected" Sculley and would support him
to run the company. Eisenstat faced Jobs direcdy and said much the
same thing: HelikedJobs butwas supporting Sculley. Regis McKenna,
who sat in on senior staffmeetings as an outside consultant, was more
direct. He looked atJobs and toldhim he was not yet ready to run the

company, something he had told him before. Others sided with Sculley
as well. For Bill Campbell, it was particularly tough. He was fond of
Jobs and didn't particularly like Sculley. His voice quavered a bit as he
told Jobs he had decided to support Sculley, and he urged the two of
them to workit out andfind some role forJobs to play in the company.
"You can't let Steve leave this company," he told Sculley.

Jobs looked shattered. "Iguess I know where things stand," hesaid,
and bolted out of the room. No one followed.

He went back to his office, gathered his longtime loyalists on the
Macintosh staff, and started to cry. He would have to leave Apple,
he said. As he started to walk out the door, Debi Coleman restrained

him. She andthe others urged him to settle down andnot do anything
hasty. He should take the weekend toregroup. Perhaps there was away
to prevent the company from being torn apart.

Sculley was devastated by his victory. Like a wounded warrior, he
retreated to Eisenstat's office and asked the corporate counsel to go

for a ride. When they got into Eisenstat's Porsche, Sculley lamented,
"I don't know whether I can go through with this." When Eisenstat
asked what he meant, Sculley responded, "I think I'mgoing to resign."
"You can't," Eisenstat protested. "Apple will fall apart."

Icarus

203

"I'm going to resign," Sculley declared. "I don't think I'm right for
the company."

"I think you're copping out," Eisenstat replied. "You've got to stand
up to him." Then he drove Sculley home.
Sculley's wife was surprised to see him back in the middle of the
day. "I've failed," he said to her forlornly. She was a volatile woman
who hadnever Uked Jobs or appreciated herhusband's infatuation with

him. So when she heard what had happened, she jumped into her car
and sped over toJobs's office. Informed that he had gone to the Good
Earth restaurant, she marched over there and confronted him in the

parking lot as hewas coming outwith loyalists on his Macintosh team.

"Steve, can I talk to you?" she said. His jaw dropped. "Do you have
anyideawhat a privilege it has been even to know someone as fine as

John Sculley?" she demanded. He averted his gaze. "Can't you look me
in the eyes when I'm talking to you?" she asked. Butwhen Jobs did
so—giving her his practiced, unblinking stare—she recoiled. "Never

mind, don't look at me," she said. "When I look into most people's
eyes, I see a soul. When I look into your eyes, I see abottomless pit, an
empty hole, a dead zone." Then she walked away.
Saturday, May 25: Mike Murray drove to Jobs's house in Woodside

to offer some advice: He should consider accepting the role ofbeing
a new product visionary, starting AppleLabs, and getting away from
headquarters. Jobs seemed willing to consider it. But first he would

have to restore peace with Sculley. So he picked up the telephone and
surprised Sculley with an olive branch. Could they meet the following
afternoon, Jobs asked, and take awalk together inthe hills above Stan
ford University. They had walked there in the past, in happier times,
and maybe on such awalk they could work things out.
Jobs did not know that Sculley had told Eisenstat he wanted to

quit, but by then it didn't matter. Overnight, he had changed his mind
and decided to stay. Despite the blowup the day before, he was still
eager for Jobs to like him. So he agreed to meet the next afternoon.
If Jobs was prepping for conciliation, it didn't show in the choice

ofmovie he wanted to see with Murray that night. He picked Patton,
the epic ofthe never-surrender general. But he had lent his copy ofthe

204

Walter Isaacson

tape to his father, who had once ferried troops for the general, so he
drove to his childhood home with Murray to retrieve it. His parents
weren't there, and he didn't have a key. They walked around the back,
checked forunlocked doors orwindows, and finally gave up.The video
store didn't have a copy ofPatton in stock, soin the endhe hadto settle

for watching the 1983 film adaptation ofHarold Pinter's Betrayal.

Sunday, May 26: As planned,Jobs and Sculley met inback ofthe Stan
ford campus on Sunday afternoon and walked for several hours amid
the rolling hills and horse pastures. Jobs reiterated his plea that he
should have anoperational role atApple. This time Sculley stood firm.
It won't work, he kept saying. Sculley urged him to take the role of
being a product visionary with a lab ofhis own, butJobs rejected this
as making him into a mere "figurehead." Defying all connection to
reality, he countered with the proposal that Sculley give up control of
the entire company to him. "Why don't you become chairman and I'll

become president and chief executive officer?" he suggested. Sculley
was struck by howearnest he seemed.
"Steve, that doesn't make any sense," Sculley replied. Jobs then

proposed that they split the duties ofrunning the company, with him
handling the product side and Sculley handling marketing and busi
ness. But the board had not only emboldened Sculley, it had ordered
him tobringJobs toheel. "One person has got torun the company," he
replied. "I've gotthe support and you don't."
On his way home, Jobs stopped at Mike Markkula's house. He
wasn't there, soJobs left a message asking him to come to dinner the

following evening. He would also invite the core ofloyalists from his
Macintosh team. He hoped thatthey could persuade Markkula ofthe
folly of sidingwith Sculley.

Monday, May 27: Memorial Daywas sunny and warm. The Macintosh
team loyalists—Debi Coleman, Mike Murray, Susan Barnes, and Bob
Belleville—got toJobs's Woodside home an hour before the scheduled
dinner so they could plot strategy. Sitting on the patio as the sun set,
Coleman toldJobs that he should accept Sculley's offer to be a product

Icarus

205

visionary and help start up AppleLabs. Of all the inner circle, Cole

man was the most willing tobe realistic. In the new organization plan,
Sculley had tapped her to run the manufacturing division because he
knew that herloyalty was to Apple and notjust toJobs. Some of the
others were more hawkish. They wanted to urge Markkula to support
a reorganization plan that putJobs in charge.

When Markkula showed up, he agreed to listen with one proviso:
Jobs had tokeep quiet. "Iseriously wanted tohear the thoughts ofthe
Macintosh team, notwatchJobs enlist themin a rebellion," he recalled.

As it turned cooler, they went inside the sparsely furnished mansion
and sat by a fireplace. Instead of letting it turn into a gripe session,
Markkula made them focus on very specific management issues, such
as what had caused the problem in producing the FileServer software
and why the Macintosh distribution system had not responded well
to the change indemand. When they were finished, Markkula blundy
declined tobackJobs. "Isaid I wouldn't support his plan, and that was
the end ofthat," Markkula recalled. "Sculley was the boss. They were
mad and emotional and putting together a revolt, but that's not how
you do things."

Tuesday, May 28: His ire stoked by hearing from Markkula thatJobs

had spent the previous evening trying to subvert him, Sculley walked
over toJobs's office onTuesday morning. He had talked to the board,
he said, and he had its support. He wanted Jobs out. Then he drove

to Markkula's house, where he gave a presentation of his reorganiza
tion plans. Markkula asked detailed questions, and at the end he gave
Sculley his blessing. When he got back to his office, Sculley called the
other members of the board, just to make sure he still had theirback
ing. He did.
At that point he called Jobs to make sure he understood. The

board had given final approval ofhis reorganization plan, which would
proceed that week. Gassee would take over control ofJobs's beloved
Macintosh as well as other products, and there was no other divi

sion for Jobs to run. Sculley was still somewhat conciliatory. He told
Jobs that he could stay on with the tide of board chairman and be a

206

Walter Isaacson

product visionary with no operational duties. But by this point, even
the idea of starting a skunkworks such as AppleLabs was no longer
on the table.

It finally sank in.Jobs realized there was no appeal, no way to warp
the reality. He broke down in tears and started making phone calls—

to Bill Campbell, Jay Elliot, Mike Murray, and others. Murray's wife,
Joyce, was on an overseas call when Jobs phoned, and the operator
broke in saying it was an emergency. It better be important, she told
the operator. "It is," she heard Jobs say. When her husband got onthe
phone, Jobs was crying. "It's over," hesaid. Then hehung up.
Murray was worried that Jobs was so despondent he might do
something rash, so he called back. There was no answer, so he drove
to Woodside. No one came to the door when he knocked, so he went

around back and climbed up some exterior steps and looked in the
bedroom. Jobs was lying there ona mattress in his unfurnished room.
He let Murray in andthey talked until almost dawn.

Wednesday, May 29: Jobs finally got hold of a tape of Patton, which
hewatched Wednesday evening, butMurray prevented himfrom get
ting stoked up for another battle. Instead he urged Jobs to come in on

Friday for Sculley's announcement ofthe reorganization plan. There
was no option left other than to play the good soldier rather than the
renegade commander.

Like a Rolling Stone
Jobs slipped quiedy into the back row of the auditorium to listen to
Sculley explain to the troops the new order of battle. There were a
lot of sideways glances, but few people acknowledged him and none
came over to provide public displays of affection. He stared without

blinking at Sculley, who would remember "Steve's look of contempt"
years later. "It's unyielding," Sculley recalled, "like an X-ray boring
inside your bones, down to where you're soft and destructibly mor
tal." For a moment, standing onstage while pretending not to notice
Jobs, Sculley thought back to a friendly trip they had taken a year ear-

Icarus

207

lier to Cambridge, Massachusetts, to visit Jobs's hero, Edwin Land.
He had been dethroned from the company he created, Polaroid, and

Jobs had said to Sculley in disgust, "All he did was blow a lousy few
million and they took his company away from him." Now, Sculley re
flected, hewas taking Jobs's company away from him.
As Sculley went over the organizational chart, he introduced Gas
see as the new head of a combined Macintosh and Apple II product
group. On the chart was a small box labeled "chairman"with no lines

connecting to it, not to Sculley or to anyone else. Sculley briefly noted
that in that role, Jobs would play the part of"global visionary." But he

didn't acknowledge Jobs's presence. There was a smattering of awk
ward applause.

Jobs stayed home for the next few days, blinds drawn, his answering
machine on, seeing only his girlfriend, Tina Redse. For hours on end

he sat there playing his Bob Dylan tapes, especially "The Times They
Are a-Changin.'" He had recited the second verse the day he unveiled
the Macintosh to the Apple shareholders sixteen months earlier. That
verse ended nicely: "Forthe loser now/ Will be later to win "

A rescue squad from his former Macintosh posse arrived to dispel
the gloom on Sunday night, led by Andy Hertzfeld and Bill Atkin
son.Jobs took a while to answer their knock, and then he led them

to a room next to the kitchen that was one ofthe few places with any
furniture. With Redse's help, he served some vegetarian food he had
ordered. "So what really happened?" Hertzfeld asked. "Is it really as
bad as it looks?"

"No, it's worse." Jobs grimaced. "It's much worse than you can
imagine." He blamed Sculley for betraying him, and said that Apple
would not be able to manage without him. His role as chairman, he
complained, was completely ceremonial. Hewas being ejected* from his

Bandley 3 office to a small and almost empty building he nicknamed
"Siberia." Hertzfeld turned the topic to happier days, and they began
to reminisce about the past.

Earlier that week, Dylan had released a new album, Empire Bur
lesque, and Hertzfeld brought a copy that they played on Jobs's hightech turntable. The most notable track, "When the Night Comes

208

Walter Isaacson

Falling from the Sky," withits apocalyptic message, seemed appropri
ate for the evening, butJobs didn't like it.It sounded almost disco, and
he gloomily argued that Dylan had been going downhill since Blood
on the Tracks. So Hertzfeld moved the needle to the last song on the

album, "Dark Eyes," which was a simple acoustic number featuring
Dylan alone onguitar and harmonica. It was slow and mournful and,
Hertzfeld hoped, would remind Jobs ofthe earlier Dylan tracks he so
loved. ButJobs didn't like that song either and had no desire to hear
the rest of the album.

Jobs's overwrought reaction was understandable. Sculley had once
been a father figure to him. So had Mike Markkula. So had Arthur
Rock. That week all three had abandoned him. "It gets back to the

deep feeling of being rejected at an early age," his friend and lawyer
George Riley later said. "It's a deep part ofhis own mythology, and it
defines to himself who he is." Jobs recalled years later, "I felt like I'd

been punched, the air knocked out ofme and I couldn't breathe."
Losing the support ofArthur Rock was especially painful. "Arthur
had been like a father to me," Jobs said. "He took me under his wing."

Rock had taught him about opera, and he and his wife,Toni, had been
his hosts in San Francisco and Aspen. "I remember driving into San
Francisco one time, and I said to him, 'God, that Bank of America

building is ugly,' and he said, 'No, it's the best,' andlie proceeded to
lecture me, and he was right of course." Years later Jobs's eyes welled
with tears as he recounted the story: "He chose Sculley over me. That
really t|irew me for aloop. I never thought he would abandon me."
Making matters worse was that his beloved company was now
in the hands of a man he considered a bozo. "The board felt that I

couldn't runa company, and thatwas their decision to make," he said.
"But they made one mistake. They should have separated the decision
of what to do with me and what to do with Sculley. They should have

fired Sculley, even ifthey didn't think I was ready to run Apple." Even
as his personal gloom slowly lifted, his anger at Sculley, his feeling of
betrayal, deepened.
The situation worsened when Sculley told a group of analysts that

he considered Jobs irrelevant to the company, despite his tide as chair
man. "From an operations standpoint, there is no role either today or

Icarus

209

in the future for Steve Jobs," he said. "I don't know what he'll do."

The blunt comment shocked the group, and a gasp went through the
auditorium.

Perhaps getting away to Europe would help, Jobs thought. So in
June he went to Paris,where he spoke at an Apple event and went to
a dinner honoring Vice President George H. W. Bush. From there
he went to Italy, where he drove the hills of Tuscany with Redse and
bought a bike so he could spend time riding by himself. In Florence
he soaked in the architecture of the city and the texture of the build
ing materials. Particularly memorable were the paving stones, which
came from II Casone quarry nearthe Tuscan town of Firenzuola. They
were a calmingbluishgray. Twentyyears later he would decide that the
floors of most majorApple stores wouldbe made of this sandstone.
The Apple II wasjust going on sale in Russia, so Jobs headed off
to Moscow, where he met up with Al Eisenstat. Because there was a
problem gettingWashington's approval forsome of the required export
licenses, theyvisited the commercial attache at the American embassy
in Moscow, Mike Merwin. He warned them that there were strict

laws against sharing technology with the Soviets. Jobs was annoyed.
At the Paris trade show, Vice President Bush had encouraged him to
get computers into Russia in order to "foment revolution from below."

Over dinner at a Georgian restaurant that specialized in shish kebab,
Jobs continued his rant. "How could you suggest this violates Ameri
can lawwhen it so obviously benefits our interests?" he askedMerwin.
"By putting Macs in the hands of Russians, they could print all their
newspapers."

Jobs also showed his feisty side in Moscow by insisting on talk
ing aboutTrotsky, the charismatic revolutionary who fell out of favor
and was ordered assassinated by Stalin. At one point the KGB agent
assigned to him suggested he tone down his fervor. "You don't want
to talk about Trotsky," he said."Our historians have studied the situa
tion, and we don't believe he's a great man anymore." That didn't help.
When theygot to the state university in Moscow to speak to computer
students, Jobs began his speech by praising Trotsky. He was a revolu
tionaryJobs could identifywith.
Jobs and Eisenstat attended the July Fourth party at the American

210

Walter Isaacson

embassy, and in his thank-you letter to Ambassador Arthur Hartman,
Eisenstat noted that Jobs planned to pursue Apple's ventures in Rus
sia more vigorously in the coming year. "We are tentatively planning
on returning to Moscow in September." For a moment it looked as if
Sculley's hope that Jobs would turn into a "global visionary" for the
companymight come to pass. But it was not to be. Something much
differentwas in store for September.

CHAPTER

EIGHTEEN

NeXT
Prometheus Unbound

The PiratesAbandon Ship
Upon his return from Europe in August 1985, while he was casting
about for what to do next, Jobs called the Stanford biochemist Paul

Berg to discuss the advances thatwere being made in gene splicing and
recombinant DNA. Berg described how difficult it was to do experi
ments in a biology lab, where it could take weeks to nurture an experi
ment and get a result. "Whydon't you simulate them on a computer?"
Jobs asked. Berg replied that computers with such capacities were too
expensive for university labs. "Suddenly, he was excited about the pos
sibilities," Berg recalled. "Hehad it inhis mind to start a new company.

211

212

Walter Isaacson

He wasyoung and rich, and had to find somethingto do with the rest
of his life."

Jobs had already been canvassing academics to askwhat their work
station needs were. It was something he had been interested in since
1983,when he had visited the computer science department at Brown
to show off the Macintosh, only to be told that it would take a far
more powerful machine to do anything useful in a university lab. The
dream of academic researchers was to have a workstation that was both

powerful and personal. As head of the Macintosh division, Jobs had
launched a project to build sucha machine, whichwasdubbed the Big
Mac. It would have a UNIX operating system but with the friendly
Macintosh interface. But after Jobs was ousted from the Macintosh

division, his replacement, Jean-Louis Gassee, canceled the Big Mac.
When that happened, Jobs got a distressed call from Rich Page,
who had been engineering the Big Mac's chip set. It was the latest in
a series of conversations that Jobs was having with disgrunded Apple
employees urging him to start a newcompany and rescue them. Plans
to do so began to jell over Labor Day weekend, when Jobs spoke to
Bud Tribble, the original Macintosh software chief, and floated the
idea of starting a company to build a powerful but personal worksta
tion. He also enlisted two other Macintosh division employees who
had been talking about leaving, the engineer George Crow and the
controller Susan Barnes.

That left one keyvacancy on the team: a person who could mar
ket the new product to universities. The obvious candidate was Danl
Lewin, who at Apple had organized a consortium of universities to
buyMacintosh computers in bulk. Besides missing two letters in his
first name, Lewin had the chiseled good looks of Clark Kent and a
Princetonian's polish. He andJobs shared a bond: Lewin had written
a Princeton thesis on Bob Dylan and charismatic leadership, andJobs
knew somethingabout both of those topics.
Lewin's university consortium had been a godsend to the Mac
intosh group, but he had become frustrated after Jobs left and Bill
Campbell had reorganized marketing in away that reduced the role of
directsales to universities. He had been meaningto callJobs when, that

NeXT

213

Labor Day weekend, Jobs called first. He drove to Jobs's unfurnished
mansion, and theywalked the grounds while discussing the possibility
of creating a new company. Lewin was excited, but not ready to com
mit. He was going to Austin with Campbell the following week, and

he wanted to wait until then to decide. Upon his return, he gave his
answer: He was in.The news came just in time for the September 13
Apple board meeting.
AlthoughJobswas stillnominally the board's chairman, he had not
been to any meetings since he lost power. He called Sculley, said he
was going to attend, and askedthat an item be added to the end of the
agenda for a "chairman's report." He didn't say what it was about, and

Sculley assumed it would be a criticism of the latest reorganization.
Instead, when his turn came to speak, Jobs described to the board his
plans to start a new company. "I've been thinking a lot, and it's time
for me to get on with my life," he began. "It's obvious that I've got to
do something. I'm thirtyyears old." Then he referred to some prepared
notes to describe his plan to create a computer for the higher educa
tion market. The new company would not be competitive with Apple,
he promised, and he would take with him only a handful of non-key
personnel. He offered to resign as chairman ofApple, but he expressed
hope that they could work together. Perhaps Apple would want to buy
the distribution rights to his product, he suggested, or license Macin
tosh software to it.

Mike Markkula rankled at thepossibility thatJobs would hire any
one from Apple. "Whywould you take anyone at all?" he asked.
"Don't get upset,"Jobs assured him and the rest of the board."These

are very low-level people that you won't miss, andthey will be leaving
anyway."

The board initially seemed disposed to wish Jobs well in his ven
ture. After a private discussion, thedirectors even proposed thatApple
take a 10% stake in the new company and that Jobs remain on the
board.

That night Jobs and his five renegades met again at his house for
dinner. He was in favor oftaking theApple investment, but the others
convinced him it was unwise. They also agreed that it would be best

214

Walter Isaacson

if they resigned all at once, right away. Then they could make a clean
break.

So Jobs wrote a formal letter telling Sculleythe names of the five
who would be leaving, signed it in his spidery lowercase signature,
and drove to Apple the next morningto hand it to him beforehis 7:30
staff meeting.
"Steve, these are not low-level people," Sculley said.
"Well, these people were going to resign anyway," Jobs replied.
"They are going to be handing in their resignations by nine this
morning."
FromJobs's perspective, he had been honest.The five were not di

vision managers or members of Sculley's top team. They had all felt
diminished, in fact, by the company's new organization. But from
Sculley's perspective, these were importantplayers; Pagewas an Apple
Fellow, and Lewin was a keyto the higher education market.In addi
tion, they knew about the plans for BigMac; even though it had been
shelved, this was still proprietary information. Nevertheless Sculley
was sanguine. Instead of pushingthe point,he asked Jobs to remainon
the board.Jobs replied that he would think about it.
But when Sculley walked into his 7:30 staff meeting and told his
top lieutenants whowas leaving, therewas an uproar. Most ofthem felt
that Jobs had breached his duties as chairman and displayed stunning
disloyalty to the company. "We should expose him for the fraud that
he is so that people here stop regarding him as a messiah," Campbell
shouted, according to Sculley.
Campbell admitted that, although he laterbecame a greatJobs de
fender and supportive board member, he was ballistic that morning.
"I was fucking furious, especially about him taking Dan'l Lewin," he
recalled. "Dan'l had built the relationships with the universities. He
was always muttering about howhard it was to workwith Steve, and
then he left." Campbell was so angry that he walked out of the meet
ing to call Lewin at home. When his wife said he was in the shower,
Campbell said, "I'll wait." A few minutes later, when she said he was
still in the shower, Campbell again said, "I'll wait." When Lewin fi
nally came on the phone, Campbell asked him if it was true. Lewin
acknowledged it was. Campbell hungup withoutsaying anotherword.

NeXT

215

After hearing the fury of his senior staff, Sculley surveyed the
members of the board. They likewise felt that Jobs had misled them
with his pledge that he would not raid important employees. Arthur
Rock was especially angry. Even though he had sided with Sculley
during the Memorial Day showdown, he had been able to repair his
paternal relationship with Jobs. Just the week before, he had invited
Jobs to bring his girlfriend up to San Francisco so that he and his
wife could meet her, and the four had a nice dinner in Rock's Pacific

Heights home. Jobs had not mentioned the new company he was
forming, so Rock felt betrayed when he heard about it from Sculley.
"He came to the board and lied to us," Rock growled later. "He told
us he was thinking of forming a company when in fact he had already
formed it. He said he was going to take a few middle-level people. It
turned out to be five senior people." Markkula, in his subdued way, was
also offended. "He took some top executives he had secretly lined up
before he left.That's not the way you do things. It was ungentlemanly."
Over the weekend both the board and the executive staff convinced

Sculley that Apple would have to declare war on its cofounder. Mark
kula issued a formal statement accusing Jobs of acting "in direct con

tradiction to his statements that he wouldn't recruit any key Apple
personnel for his company." He added ominously, "We are evaluating
what possible actions should be taken." Campbell was quoted in the
Wall Street Journal as saying he "was stunned and shocked" by Jobs's
behavior.

Jobs had left his meeting with Sculley thinking that things might
proceed smoothly, sohe had kept quiet. But after reading the newspa
pers, he feltthat he hadto respond. He phoned a few favored reporters
and invited them to his home for private briefings the next day. Then
he called Andy Cunningham, who had handled his publicity at Regis
McKenna. "I went over to his unfurnished mansiony place in Woodside," she recalled, "and I found him huddled in the kitchen with his

five colleagues and a few reporters hanging outside on the lawn." Jobs
told her that he was going to do a full-fledged press conference and
started spewing some of the derogatory things he was going to say.
Cunningham was appalled. "This isgoing to reflect badly on you," she
told him. Finally he backed down. He decided that he would give the

216

Walter Isaacson

reporters a copy of the resignation letter and limit any on-the-record
comments to a few bland statements.

Jobs had considered just mailing in his letter of resignation, but
Susan Barnes convinced him that this would be too contemptuous.
Instead he drove it to Markkula's house,where he also found Al Eisen
stat. There was a tense conversation for about fifteen minutes; then

Barnes, who had been waiting outside, came to the door to retrieve
him before he said anything he would regret. He left behind the let
ter, which he had composed on a Macintosh and printed on the new
LaserWriter:

September 17,1985
Dear Mike:

This morning'spapers carried suggestions thatApple isconsid
ering removing me as Chairman. Idont know the source ofthese
reports but they are both misleading to thepublic andunfair tome.
You will recall that at last Thursdays Board meeting I statedI
haddecided tostart a new venture andI tendered my resignation as
Chairman.

The Board declined to accept my resignation and asked me to defer
itfora week I agreed to do so inlight ofthe encouragement the Board
offered with regard to theproposed new venture and the indications
thatApple would invest init On Friday, after I toldJohn Sculley
who would bejoining me, he confirmedApple's willingness to discuss
areas ofpossible collaboration between Apple and my new venture.
Subsequently the Company appears to be adopting a hostile
posture toward me and the new venture. Accordingly, I must insist
upon the immediate acceptance ofmy resignation
Asyou know, the company's recent reorganization left me with
no work todo andno access even to regular management reports. I
am but 30 and want still to contribute and achieve.

After what wehave accomplished together, I would wish our
parting tobe both amicable anddignified.
Yours sincerely, stevenp.jobs

NeXT

217

When a guyfrom the facilities team went to Jobs s office to pack up
hisbelongings, he saw a picture frame on the floor. It contained a pho
tograph ofJobs and Sculley in warm conversation, with an inscription
from seven months earlier: "Here's to Great Ideas, Great Experiences,
and a Great Friendship! John/' The glass frame was shattered. Jobs
had hurledit across the room before leaving. From that day, he never
spoke to Sculley again.

Apples stock went up a full point, or almost 7%, when Jobs's resigna
tion was announced. "East Coast stockholders always worried about
California flakes running the company/' explained the editor of a tech
stock newsletter. "Nowwith both Wozniak and Jobs out, those share
holders are relieved." But Nolan Bushnell, the Atari founder who had
beenan amused mentorten years earlier, told Time that Jobswould be

badly missed. "Where is Apple s inspiration going to come from? Is
Apple going to have all the romance ofa new brand ofPepsi?"
After a few days of failed efforts to reach a settlement withJobs,
Sculley and the Apple board decided to suehim "for breaches of fidu
ciary obligations." The suit spelled outhis alleged transgressions:
Notwithstanding his fiduciary obligations to Apple, Jobs, while serving
as the Chairman ofApples Board ofDirectors and anofficer ofApple
andpretending loyalty to the interests ofApple ...
(a) secredy planned the formation ofanenterprise to compete with
Apple;

(b) secretly schemed thathis competing enterprise would wrongfully
take advantage ofandutilize Apple splan to design, develop andmarket
the Next Generation Product...

(c) secredy lured away key employees ofApple.

At the time, Jobs owned 6.5 million shares ofApple stock, 11% of
the company, worth more than $100 million. He began to sell his
shares, and within five months had dumped them all, retaining only
one share so he could attend shareholder meetings if he wanted. He
was furious, and that was reflected iri his passion to start what was,
no matter howhe spun it, a rival company. "He was angry at Apple,"

218

Walter Isaacson

saidJoanna Hoffman, who briefly went to work for the new company.
"Aiming at the educational market, where Applewas strong, was sim

plySteve beingvengeful. He was doing it for revenge."
Jobs, of course, didn't see it that way. "I haven't got any sort of odd
chip on my shoulder," he told Newsweek. Once again he invited his
favorite reporters over to hisWoodside home, and this time he did not
have Andy Cunningham there urging him to be circumspect. He dis
missed the allegation that he had improperly lured the five colleagues
from Apple. "These people all called me," he told the gaggle of jour
nalists who were milling around in his unfurnished living room. "They
were thinking of leaving the company. Apple has a way of neglecting
people."
He decided to cooperate with a Newsweek cover in order to get
his version of the story out, and the interview he gave was revealing.
"What I'mbestat doing isfinding a group oftalented people andmak

ing things with them," he told the magazine. He said that he would
always harbor affection for Apple. "I'll always remember Apple like
any man remembers the first woman he's fallen in love with." But he
was also willing to fight withitsmanagement if need be."When some
one calls you a thiefin public, you have to respond." Apple's threat to
sue him was outrageous. It was also sad. It showed that Apple was no
longer a confident, rebellious company. "It's hard to thinkthat a $2 bil
lion company with 4,300 employees couldn't compete with six people
in bluejeans."

To try to counterJobs's spin, Sculley called Wozniak andurged him
to speak out. "Steve can be an insulting andhurtful guy," he told Time
that week. He revealed that Jobs had asked him to join his newfirm—
it would have been a sly way to landanother blow against Apple's cur
rent management—but he wanted no part of such games and had not
returned Jobs's phone call. To the San Francisco Chronicle, he recounted
how Jobs had blocked frogdesign from working on his remote control
under the pretense that it might compete with Apple products. "I look
forward to a great product and I wish him success, but his integrity I
cannot trust," Wozniak said.

NeXT

219

To Be on Your Own

"The best thing ever to happen to Steve is when we fired him, told
himto getlost," ArthurRock later said. The theory, shared bymany, is
that the tough love made him wiserand more mature. But it's not that

simple. At the company he founded after being ousted from Apple,
Jobs was able to indulge all of his instincts, both good and bad. He
was unbound. The result was a series ofspectacular products thatwere
dazzling market flops. This was the true learning experience. What
prepared him for the great success he wouldhave in Act III was not his
ouster from his Act I at Apple but his brilliant failures in Act II.
The first instinct that he indulged was his passion for design. The
name he chose for his new company was rather straightforward: Next.
In order to make it more distinctive, he decided he needed a world-

class logo. So he courted the dean of corporate logos, Paul Rand. At
seventy-one, the Brooklyn-born graphic designer had already created
some of the best-known logos in business, including those ofEsquire,
IBM, Westinghouse, ABC, and UPS. He was under contractto IBM,

and his supervisors there said that it would obviously be a conflict for
him to create a logo for another computer company. So Jobs picked
up the phone and called IBM's CEO, John Akers. Akers was out of

town, butJobs was so persistent thathewas finally putthrough to Vice
Chairman Paul Rizzo. After two days, Rizzo concluded that it was
futile to resist Jobs, and he gave permission for Rand to do the work.
Rand flew out to Palo Alto and spent time walking withJobs and
listening tohis vision. Thecomputer would beacube,Jobs pronounced.
He loved that shape. It was perfect and simple. So Rand decided that
the logo should be a cube as well, one that was tilted at a 28° angle.
When Jobs asked for a number of options to consider, Rand declared
that he did not create different options for clients. "I will solve your
problem, and you will pay me," hetold Jobs. "You can use what I pro
duce, ornot, butI will notdo options, and either way you will pay me."
Jobs admired that kind of thinking, so he made what was quite a
gamble. The company would pay an astonishing $100,000 flat fee to
get one design. "There was a clarity in ourrelationship," Jobs said. "He

220

Walter Isaacson

had a purity as an artist, but he was astute at solving business prob
lems. He had a tough exterior, and had perfected the image of a cur
mudgeon, but he was a teddy bearinside." It was one ofJobs's highest
praises: purity as an artist.
It took Rand just two weeks. He flew back to deliver the result to
Jobs at his Woodside house. First they had dinner, then Rand handed
him an elegant andvibrant booklet that described his thoughtprocess.
On the final spread, Rand presented the logo he had chosen. "In its
design, color arrangement, and orientation, the logo is a study in con
trasts," hisbooklet proclaimed. "Tipped at ajauntyangle, it brims with
the informality, friendliness, and spontaneity of a Christmas seal and
the authority of a rubber stamp." The word "next" was split into two
lines to fill the square face of the cube, with only the "e" in lowercase.
That letterstoodout, Rand's booklet explained, to connote "education,
excellence ... e = mc2."

It was often hard to predict howJobs would react to a presenta
tion. He could label it shitty or brilliant; one never knew which way
he might go. Butwith a legendary designer such as Rand, the chances
were that Jobs would embrace the proposal. He stared at the final
spread, looked up at Rand, andthenhugged him. Theyhadoneminor
disagreement: Rand hadused a dark yellow for the"e" in the logo, and
Jobs wanted him to change it to a brighter and more traditional yellow.
Rand banged hisfist on the table anddeclared, "I've been doing thisfor
fifty years, and I know whatI'm doing." Jobs relented.
The company had not only a new logo, but a newname. No longer
was it Next. It was NeXT. Others mightnot have understood the need
to obsess over a logo, much less pay$100,000 for one. But forJobs it
meant that NeXT was startinglifewith a world-class feeland identity,
even if it hadn't yetdesigned itsfirst product. As Markkula had taught
him, a great company must be able to impute its values from the first
impression it makes.
As a bonus, Rand agreed to design a personal calling cardforJobs.
He came up with a colorful type treatment, which Jobs liked, but they
ended up having a lengthy and heated disagreement about the place
mentofthe period after the"P"in Steven P. Jobs. Rand hadplaced the
period to the right of the "P.", as it would appear if set in lead type.

NeXT

221

Steve preferred the period to be nudged to the left, under the curve

of the "R", as is possible with digital typography. "It was a fairly large
argument about something relatively small," Susan Kare recalled. On
this oneJobs prevailed.

In order to translate the NeXT logo into the look of real products,
Jobs needed anindustrial designer hetrusted. He talked to a few possi
bilities, but none of them impressed him as much asthe wildBavarian
he had imported to Apple: Hartmut Esslinger, whose frogdesign had
set up shop in Silicon Valley and who, thanks to Jobs, had a lucrative
contract with Apple. Getting IBM to permit Paul Rand to do work

for NeXT was a small miracle willed into existence byJobs's beliefthat
reality can bedistorted. Butthatwas a snap compared to thelikelihood
that he could convince Apple to permit Esslinger to work for NeXT.
This did notkeep Jobs from trying. At the beginning ofNovember
1985, just five weeks after Apple filed suit against him, Jobs wrote to
Eisenstat and asked for a dispensation. "I spoke with Hartmut Ess

linger this weekend and he suggested I write you a note expressing
why I wish to work with him and frogdesign on the new products for
NeXT," he said. Astonishingly, Jobs's argument was that he did not
know what Apple hadin theworks, but Esslinger did. "NeXT has no

knowledge as to the current orfuture directions ofApple's product de
signs, nordoother design firms we might deal with, so it ispossible to
inadvertendy design similar looking products. It is in both Apple's and
NeXT's best interest to rely onHartmut's professionalism to make sure
this does not occur." Eisenstat recalled being flabbergasted by Jobs's
audacity, and hereplied curtly. "Ihave previously expressed my concern
op behalfofApple that you are engaged in a business course which in
volves your utilization ofApple's confidential business information," he
wrote. "Your letter does not alleviate my concern in any way. In fact it

heightens my concern because it states that you have no knowledge as
to the current or future directions ofApple's product designs,' a state
ment which is not true." What made therequest all the more astonish
ingto Eisenstat was that it was Jobs who, justa year earlier, hadforced
frogdesign to abandon its work on Wozniak's remote control device.

Jobs realized that in order to work with Esslinger (and for a vari
ety of otherreasons), it would be necessary to resolve the lawsuit that

222

Walter Isaacson

Apple had filed. Fortunately Sculley was willing. In January1986they
reached an out-of-court agreement involving no financial damages. In
return for Apple's dropping its suit, NeXT agreed to a variety of re
strictions: Its product would be marketed as a high-end workstation,
it would be sold directly to colleges and universities, and it would not
ship before March 1987. Apple also insisted that the NeXT machine
"notuse an operating system compatible with the Macintosh," though
it could be argued that Apple would have beenbetter served by insist
ing on just the opposite.
After the settlement Jobs continued to court Esslinger until the
designer decided to wind down his contract withApple. That allowed
frogdesign to work with NeXT at the end of 1986. Esslinger insisted
on having free rein, just as Paul Randhad. "Sometimes youhave to use
a big stickwith Steve," he said. Like Rand, Esslinger was an artist, so
Jobs was willing to granthim indulgences he denied other mortals.
Jobs decreed that the computer should be an absolutely perfect
cube, with each side exacdy a foot long and every angle precisely 90
degrees. He liked cubes. They had gravitas but also the slight whifif
of a toy. But the NeXT cube was a Jobsian example of design desires

trumping engineering considerations. The circuit boards, which fitted
nicely intothe traditional pizza-box shape, hadto be reconfigured and
stacked in order to nestle into a cube.

Even worse, the perfection ofthe cube made it hardto manufacture.
Most parts that are cast in molds have angles that are slightly greater
than pure 90 degrees, so that it's easier to get them out of the mold
(just as it is easier to get a cake out of a pan that has angles slightly
greater than 90 degrees). But Esslinger dictated, andJobs enthusiasti
cally agreed, that there would beno such "draft angles" that would ruin
the purity and perfection ofthe cube. So the sides hadto be produced
separately, using molds that cost $650,000, at a specialty machine shop
in Chicago. Jobs's passion for perfection was out of control. When he
noticed a tinyline in the chassis caused by the molds, something that
any other computer maker would accept as unavoidable, he flew to
Chicago and convinced the die caster to start over and do it perfecdy.
"Not a lot of die casters expect a celebrity to fly in," noted one of the
engineers. Jobs also hadthe company buy a $150,000 sanding machine

NeXT

223

to remove all lines where the mold faces met and insisted that the

magnesium case be a matte black, which made it more susceptible to
showingblemishes.

Jobs had always indulged his obsession that the unseen parts of a
product should be crafted as beautifully as its fa9ade, just as his father
had taught him when theywere building a fence. This too he took to
extremes when he found himself unfettered at NeXT. He made sure

that the screws inside the machine hadexpensive plating. He even in
sisted that the matte black finish be coated onto the inside ofthe cube's

case, even though onlyrepairmen would see it.

Joe Nocera, thenwriting for Esquire, captured Jobs's intensity at a
NeXT staffmeeting:
It's not quite right to say that he is sitting through this staff meeting,
because Jobs doesn't sit through much of anything; one of the ways he
dominates is through sheer movement. One moment hes kneeling in
his chair; thenext minute he's slouching init;thenext hehas leaped out
of his chair entirely and is scribbling on the blackboard direcdy behind
him. He is full ofmannerisms. He bites his nails. He stares with unnerv

ing earnestness at whoever is speaking. His hands, which are slighdy
and inexplicably yellow, are in constant motion.

What particularly struckNocera was Jobs's "almost willful lack of tact."

It was more than just an inability to hide his opinions when others
said something he thought dumb; it was a conscious readiness, even a
perverse eagerness, to put people down, humiliate them, show he was
smarter. When Dan'l Lewin handed out an organization chart, for ex

ample, Jobs rolled his eyes. "These charts are bullshit," he interjected.
Yet his moods still swung wildly, as at Apple. A finance person came
into themeeting andJobs lavished praise onhim for a"really, really great
job onthis"; the previous dayJobs had told him, "This deal iscrap."
One of NeXT's first ten employees was an interior designer for
the company's first headquarters, in Palo Alto. Even though Jobs had
leased a building that was new and nicely designed, he had it com
pletely gutted and rebuilt. Walls were replaced by glass, the carpets
were replaced by light hardwood flooring. The process was repeated

224

Walter Isaacson

when NeXT moved to a bigger space in Redwood City in 1989. Even
thoughthe building was brand-new, Jobs insisted that the elevators be
moved so that the entrance lobby would be more dramatic. As a cen
terpiece, Jobs commissioned I. M. Pei to design a grand staircase that
seemed to float in the air.The contractor said it couldn't be built. Jobs
said it could, and it was. Years later Jobs would make such staircases a

feature at Apple's signature stores.

The Computer
During the early months of NeXT, Jobs and Dan'l Lewin went on
the road, often accompanied by a few colleagues, to visit campuses
and solicit opinions. At Harvard they met with Mitch Kapor, the
chairman of Lotus software, over dinner at Harvest restaurant. When

Kapor began slathering butteron hisbread,Jobs asked him,"Have you
ever heard of serum cholesterol?" Kapor responded, "I'll make you a
deal. You stay away from commenting on mydietary habits, and I will
stay away from the subject of your personality." It was meant humor
ously, but as Kapor later commented, "Human relationships were not
his strong suit." Lotus agreed to write a spreadsheet program for the
NeXT operatingsystem.
Jobs wanted to bundle useful content with the machine, so Mi
chael Hawley, one of the engineers, developed a digital dictionary. He
learned that a friend of his at Oxford University Press had been in

volved in the typesetting ofa new edition of Shakespeare's works. That
meant that there was probably a computer tape he could get his hands
on and, if so, incorporate it into the NeXT's memory. "So I called up
Steve,and he said that would be awesome, and we flew over to Oxford

together." On a beautiful spring day in 1986, they metin the publish
inghouse's grand building in the heart of Oxford, where Jobs made an
offer of $2,000 plus 74 cents for every computer sold in order to have
the rights to Oxford's edition of Shakespeare. "It will be all gravy to
you," he argued. "You will be ahead oftheparade. It's never been done
before." They agreed in principle and then went out to play skittles
over beerat a nearby pubwhere Lord Byron used to drink. Bythe time

NeXT

225

it launched, the NeXT would also include a dictionary, a thesaurus,
and the OxfordDictionary ofQuotations, making it one of the pioneers
of the concept of searchable electronic books.
Instead of using off-the-shelf chips for the NeXT, Jobs had his
engineers design custom ones that integrated a variety of functions
on one chip. That would have been hard enough, but Jobs made it
almost impossible by continually revising the functions he wanted
it to do. After a year it became clear that this would be a major source
of delay.

He also insisted on building his own fully automated and futuristic
factory, justas he hadfor theMacintosh; hehad notbeen chastened by
that experience. This time too he made the same mistakes, only more
excessively. Machines and robots were painted and repainted as he
compulsively revised his color scheme. The walls were museum white,

as they had been at the Macintosh factory, and there were $20,000
black leather chairs and a custom-made staircase, just as in the corpo
rate headquarters. He insisted that the machinery on the 165-foot as
sembly line be configured to move the circuit boards from right to left
as theygot built, so that the process would lookbetter to visitors who
watched from the viewing gallery. Emptycircuit boards were fed in at
one end and twenty minutes later, untouched by humans, came out
the other end as completed boards. The process followed theJapanese
principle known as kanban, in which each machine performs its task
only when the next machine is ready to receive another part.
Jobs had not tempered his way ofdealing with employees. "Heap
plied charm or public humiliation in a way that in most cases proved
to be pretty effective," Tribble recalled. But sometimes it wasn't. One
engineer, David Paulsen, put in ninety-hour weeks for the first ten

months at NeXT. He quit when "Steve walked in one Friday after
noon andtold us how unimpressed hewas with what we were doing."
When Business Week asked him why he treated employees so harshly,
Jobs said it made the company better. "Part of my responsibiUty is to
be a yardstick of quality. Some people aren't used to an environment
where excellence is expected." Buthe still had his spirit andcharisma.
There were plenty of field trips, visits by akido masters, and off-site
retreats. And he still exuded the pirate flag spunkiness. When Apple

226

Walter Isaacson

fired Chiat/Day, the ad firm that had done the "1984" ad and taken
out the newspaper ad saying "Welcome IBM—seriously," Jobs took
out a full-page ad in the Wall StreetJournal proclaiming, "Congratula
tions Chiat/Day—Seriously... Because I can guarantee you: there is
life after Apple."
Perhaps the greatest similarity to his days at Apple was that Jobs
brought with him his reality distortion field. It was on display at the
company's first retreat at Pebble Beach in late 1985. ThereJobs pro
nounced that the first NeXT computer wouldbe shippedin just eigh
teen months. It was already clear that this date was impossible, but he
blew offa suggestion from one engineer that theybe realistic and plan
on shipping in 1988. "Ifwe do that, the world isn't standing still, the
technology window passes us by, and allthe work we've done we have
to throw down the toilet," he argued.
Joanna Hoffman, the veteran of the Macintosh team who was
among those willing to challenge Jobs, did so. "Reality distortion has
motivational value, and I think that's fine," she said as Jobs stood at a

whiteboard. "However, when it comes to setting a date in a way that
affects the design of the product, thenweget into real deep shit." Jobs

didn't agree: "I thinkwe have to drive a stake in theground somewhere,
and I think ifwe miss this window, then our credibility startsto erode."
What he did not say, even though it was suspected by all, was that if
their targets slipped they might run out of money. Jobs had pledged
$7 million of his own funds, but at their current burn rate that would

run out in eighteen months if they didn't start getting some revenue
from shippedproducts.
Three months later, when theyreturned to Pebble Beach for their
next retreat, Jobs began his list of maxims with "The honeymoon is
over." Bythe time of the third retreat, in Sonoma in September 1986,
the timetable was gone, and it looked as though the company would
hit a financial wall.

NeXT

227

Perot to the Rescue

In late 1986 Jobs sent out aproposal toventure capital firms offering a
10% stake in NeXT for $3 million. That put a valuation on the entire
company of $30 million, a number thatJobs hadpulled out of thin air.
Less than $7 million had gone into the company thus far, and there

was little to show for it other than a neat logo and some snazzy offices.
It had no revenue or products, nor any on the horizon. Not surpris
ingly, the venture capitalists all passed on the offer to invest.
Therewas, however, one cowboy who was dazzled. Ross Perot, the
bantam Texan who had founded Electronic Data Systems, then sold
it to General Motors for $2.4 billion, happened to watch a PBS docu
mentary, The Entrepreneurs, which had a segment on Jobs and NeXT

in November 1986. He instandy identified with Jobs and his gang, so
much so that, as he watched them on television, he said, "I was finish

ing their sentences for them." It was aline eerily similar to one Sculley
had often used. Perot called Jobs the next day and offered, "Ifyou ever
need an investor, call me."

Jobs did indeed need one, badly. But he was careful not to show it.

Hewaited a week before calling back. Perot sent some ofhis analysts
to size up NeXT, butJobs took care to deal directly with Perot. One

ofhis great regrets inlife, Perot later said, was that he had not bought
Microsoft, or a large stake in it, when a very young Bill Gates had
come to visit him in Dallas in 1979. By the time Perot called Jobs,
Microsoft had just gone public with a $1 billion valuation. Perot had

missed outon the opportunity to make a lot ofmoney and have a fun
adventure. Hewas eager not to make that mistake again.
Jobs made an offer to Perot that was three times more costly than
had quietly been offered to venture capitalists a few months earlier.
For $20 million, Perot would get 16% ofthe equity in the company,

after Jobs put in another $5 million. That meant the company would
be valued at about $126 million. But money was nota major consider
ation for Perot. After a meeting withJobs, he declared that he was in.
"I pick thejockeys, and thejockeys pick the horses and ride them," he

told Jobs. "You guys are the ones I'm betting on, so you figure it out."

228

Walter Isaacson

Perot brought to NeXT something that was almost as valuable as
his $20 million lifeline: He was a quotable, spirited cheerleader for the

company, who could lend it anair ofcredibility among grown-ups. "In
terms ofa startup company, it's one thatcarries theleast risk ofany I've
seen in 25years in the computer industry," he toldtheNew York Times.
"We've had some sophisticated people see the hardware—it blew them
away. Steve and his whole NeXT team are the darnedest bunch ofper
fectionists I've ever seen."

Perot also traveled in rarefied social and business circles that com

plemented Jobs's own. He tookJobs to ablack-tie dinner dance in San
Francisco that Gordon and Ann Getty gave for King Juan Carlos I

of Spain. When the king asked Perot whom he should meet, Perot
immediately produced Jobs. They were soon engaged in what Perot
later described as"electric conversation," withJobs animatedly describ

ing the next wave in computing. At the end the king scribbled a note
and handed it to Jobs. "What happened?" Perot asked. Jobs answered,
"I sold him a computer."
These and other stories were incorporated into the mythologized

story ofJobs that Perot told wherever he went. At a briefing at the
National Press Club in Washington, he spun Jobs's life story into a
Texas-size yarn about a young man
so poor he couldn't afford to go to college, working in his garage at
night, playing with computer chips, which was his hobby, and his dad—
who looks like a character out of a Norman Rockwellpainting—comes

in one day and said, "Steve, either make something you can sell orgoget

ajob." Sixty days iater, inawooden box that his dad made for him, the
first Apple computer was created. And this high school graduate liter
ally changed the world.

The one phrase thatwas true was the one about Paul Jobs's look
ing like someone in a Rockwell painting. And perhaps the last phrase,
the one about Jobs changing theworld. Certainly Perot believed that.
Like Sculley, he saw himself in Jobs. "Steve's like me," Perot told the
Washington Posh David Remnick. "We're weird inthe same way. We're
soul mates."

NeXT

229

Gates and NeXT

Bill Gates was not a soul mate. Jobs had convinced him to produce
software applications for the Macintosh, which had turned out to be

hugely profitable for Microsoft. But Gates was one person who was
resistant to Jobs's reality distortion field, and as a result he decided

not to create software tailored for the NeXT platform. Gates went to
California togetperiodic demonstrations, buteach time hecame away
unimpressed. "TheMacintosh was truly unique, but I personally don't
understand what is so unique about Steve's new computer," he told
Fortune.

Partof the problem was that the rival titans were congenitally un
able to be deferential to each other. When Gates made his first visit

to NeXT's Palo Alto headquarters, in the summer of 1987, Jobs kept
himwaiting for a halfhour in the lobby, even though Gates could see
through the glass walls that Jobs was walking around having casual
conversations. "I'd gone down to NeXT and I had the Odwalla, the
most expensive carrot juice, and I'd never seen tech offices so lavish,"

Gates recalled, shaking his head withjusta hint of a smile. "And Steve
comes a half hour late to the meeting."

Jobs's sales pitch, according to Gates, was simple. "We did the Mac
together,"Jobs said. "How did thatwork for you? Very well. Now, we're
going to do this together andthis isgoing to begreat."
But Gates was brutal to Jobs, just as Jobs could be to others. "This
machine is crap," he said. "The optical disk has too low latency, the
fucking case is too expensive. This thing is ridiculous." He decided
then, andreaffirmed on each subsequent visit, that it made no sense for
Microsoft to divert resources from other projects to develop applica
tions for NeXT. Worse yet, he repeatedly said so publicly, which made
others less likely to spend time developing for NeXT. "Develop for it?
I'll piss on it,"he toldInfo World
When they happened to meet in the hallway at a conference, Jobs
started berating Gates for his refusal to do software for NeXT. "When

you get a market, I will consider it," Gates replied. Jobs got angry. "It
was a screaming battle, right in front of everybody," recalled Adele

230

Walter Isaacson

Goldberg, theXerox PARC engineer. Jobs insisted that NeXT was the
next wave of computing. Gates, as he often did, got more expression
less as Jobs gotmore heated. He finally justshook his head andwalked
away.

Beneaththeir personal rivalry—and occasional grudgingrespect—

was their basic philosophical difference. Jobs believed in an endto-end integration ofhardware and software, which led him to build a
machine that was not compatible with others. Gates believed in, and
profited from, a world in which different companies made machines
that were compatible withone another; theirhardware ran a standard
operating system (Microsoft's Windows) and could all use the same
software apps (such as Microsoft's Word and Excel). "His product
comes with an interesting feature called incompatibility," Gates told
the Washington Post. "It doesn't run any of the existing software. It's a
super-nice computer. I don't thinkifI went outto design anincompat
ible computer I would have done as well as he did/'
At a forum in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in 1989, Jobs and Gates
appeared sequentially, laying out their competing worldviews. Jobs
spoke about how new waves come along inthecomputer industry every
few years. Macintosh had launched arevolutionary new approach with
the graphical interface; now NeXT was doing it with object-oriented

programming tied toapowerful new machine based onan optical disk.
Every major software vendor realized they had to be part of this new
wave, he said, "except Microsoft." When Gates came up, he reiterated
his beliefthat Jobs's end-to-end control of the software and the hard
ware was destined for failure, just as Apple had failed in competing

against the Microsoft Windows standard. "The hardware market and
the software market are separate," he said. When asked about the great
design that could come from Jobs's approach, Gates gestured to the
NeXT prototype thatwas still sitting onstage and sneered, "Ifyou want
black, I'll get youa can of paint."

NeXT

231

IBM

Jobs came up with a brilliant jujitsu maneuver against Gates, one that
could have changed the balance of power in the computer industry
forever. It required Jobs to do two things that were against his nature:
licensing out his software to another hardware maker and getting into
bed with IBM. He had a pragmatic streak, albeit a tiny one, so he was
able to overcome his reluctance. But his heart was never fully in it,
which is why the alliance would turn out to be short-lived.
It began at a party, a trulymemorable one, for the seventieth birth

day of the Washington Post publisher Katharine Graham inJune 1987
in Washington. Six hundred guests attended, including President
Ronald Reagan. Jobs flew in from California and IBM's chairman

John Akers from New York. It was the first time they had met. Jobs
took the opportunity to bad-mouth Microsoft and attempt to wean
IBM from using its Windows operating system. "I couldn't resist tell
ing him I thought IBM was taking a giant gamble betting its entire
software strategyon Microsoft, because I didn't think its software was
very good,"Jobs recalled.

To Jobs's delight, Akers replied, "How would you like to help us?"
Within a few weeks Jobs showed up at IBM's Armonk, New York,
headquarters with his software engineer Bud Tribble. They put on a
demo of NeXT, which impressed the IBM engineers. Of particular
significance was NeXTSTEP, the machine's object-oriented operat
ing system. "NeXTSTEP took care of a lot of trivial programming
chores that slow down the software development process," said An
drew Heller, the general manager of IBM's workstation unit,who was
so impressedbyJobs that he named his newborn son Steve.

The negotiations lasted into 1988, with Jobs becoming prickly over
tiny details. He would stalk out of meetings over disagreements about
colors or design, only to be calmed down by Tribble or Lewin. He
didn't seem to know which frightened him more, IBM or Microsoft.
In April Perot decided to play host for a mediating session at his Dal
las headquarters, and a dealwas struck: IBM would license the current

version ofthe NeXTSTEP software, and if the managers liked it, they

232

Walter Isaacson

would use it on some of their workstations. IBM sent to Palo Alto a

125-page contract. Jobs tossed it down without reading it."You don't
get it," he said as he walked out ofthe room. He demanded a simpler
contract of only a few pages, which he gotwithin a week.
Jobs wanted to keep the arrangement secret from Bill Gates until
the big unveiling ofthe NeXT computer, scheduled for October. But
IBM insisted on being forthcoming. Gates was furious. He realized
this could wean IBM off its dependence on Microsoft operating sys
tems. "NeXTSTEP isn't compatible with anything," he raged to IBM
executives.

At first Jobs seemed to have pulled off Gates's worst nightmare.
Other computer makers that were beholden to Microsoft's operating
systems, most notably Compaq and Dell, came to askJobs for theright
to clone NeXT and license NeXTSTEP.There were even offersto pay

a lot more if NeXTwould get out of the hardware business altogether.
That was too much forJobs, at leastfor the time being. He cut off
the clone discussions. And he began to cool toward IBM.The chillbe
came reciprocal. When the person who made the deal at IBM moved
on, Jobs went to Armonk to meet his replacement, Jim Cannavino.
They cleared the room and talked one-on-one. Jobs demanded more
money to keep the relationship going and to license newer versions of
NeXTSTEP to IBM. Cannavino made no commitments, and he sub

sequently stopped returning Jobs's phone calls. The deal lapsed. NeXT
got a bit of money for a licensing fee, but it never got the chance to
change the world.

The Launch, October 1988

Jobs had perfected the art of turning product launches into theatrical
productions, and for the world premiere of the NeXT computer—on
October 12,1988, in San Francisco's Symphony Hall—he wanted to
outdo himself. He needed to blow away the doubters. In the weeks
leading up to the event, he drove up to San Francisco almost every

day to hole up in the Victorian house of Susan Kare, NeXT's graphic
designer, whohaddone the original fonts andicons forthe Macintosh.

NeXT

233

She helped prepare each ofthe slides as Jobs fretted over everything
from the wording to the right hue ofgreen to serve as the background
color. "I like that green," he said proudly as they were doing atrial run
in front ofsome staffers. "Great green, great green," they all murmured
in assent.

No detailwas too small. Jobs went over the invitationlist and even

the lunch menu (mineral water, croissants, cream cheese, bean sprouts).
He picked out a video projection company and paid it $60,000 for
help. And he hired the postmodernist theater producer George Coates
tostage the show. Coates and Jobs decided, not surprisingly, onan aus
tere and radically simple stage look. The unveiling ofthe black perfect
cube would occur on a starkly minimalist stage setting with a black

background, a table covered by a black cloth, a black veil draped over
the computer, and a simple vase of flowers. Because neither the hard

ware nor the operating system was actually ready, Jobs was urged to
do a simulation. But he refused. Knowing it would be like walking a
tightrope without a net, he decided to do the demonstration live.

More than three thousand people showed up atthe event, lining up
two hours before curtain time. They were not disappointed, atleast by
the show. Jobs was onstage for three hours, and he again proved to be,
in the words of Andrew Pollack of the New York Times, "the Andrew

Lloyd Webber of product introductions, a master of stage flair and
special effects." Wes Smith ofthe Chicago Tribune said thelaunch was
"to product demonstrations what Vatican II was to church meetings."
Jobs had the audience cheering from his opening line: "It's great
tobe back." Hebegan by recounting the history ofpersonal computer
architecture, and he promised that they would now witness an event
"thatoccurs only once or twice in a decade—a time whena newarchi
tecture isrolled outthatisgoing tochange the face ofcomputing."The

NeXT software and hardware were designed, he said, after three years
of consulting with universities across the country. "What we realized
was that higher ed wants a personal mainframe."
As usual there were superlatives. The product was "incredible," he

said, "the best thing we could have imagined." He praised the beauty
of even the parts unseen. Balancing on his fingertips the foot-square
circuit board that would be nestled in the foot-cube box, he enthused,

234

Walter Isaacson

"Ihope you get achance tolook at this alittle later. It's the most beau
tiful printed circuit board I've ever seen in my life." He then showed
how the computer could play speeches—he featured King's "I Have a
Dream" and Kennedy's "Ask Not"—and send email withaudio attach
ments. He leaned intothe microphone on the computer to record one
of his own. "Hi, this is Steve, sending a message on a pretty historic

day." Then he asked those in the audience to add "a round ofapplause"
to the message, andthey did.
One ofJobs's management philosophies was thatit is crucial, every
nowandthen,to roll the dice and "betthe company" on some new idea

or technology. At the NeXT launch, he boasted of an example that,
as it turned out,would not be a wise gamble: having a high-capacity
(but slow) optical read/write disk and no floppy disk as abackup. "Two
years ago we made adecision," he said. "We saw some new technology
andwe made a decision to risk our company."
Then he turned to a feature that would prove more prescient.
"What we've done is made the first real digital books," he said, noting
the inclusion of the Oxford edition of Shakespeare and other tomes.
"There has not been an advancement in the state of the art of printed
book technology since Gutenberg."
At times he could be amusingly aware of his own foibles, and he

used the electronic book demonstration to poke fun at himself. "A
word that's sometimes used to describe me is 'mercurial,'" he said, then

paused. The audience laughed knowingly, especially those in the front
rows, which were filled with NeXT employees and former members
of the Macintosh team. Then he pulled up the word in the comput

er's dictionary and read the first definition: "Of or relating to, orborn
under the planet Mercury." Scrolling down, he said, "I thinkthe third
one isthe one theymean: 'Characterized byunpredictable changeableness of mood.'"There was a bit more laughter. "If we scroll down the

thesaurus, though, we see that the antonym is 'saturnine.' Well what's
that? By simply double-clicking on it, we immediately look that up
in the dictionary, and here it is: 'Cold and steady in moods. Slow to
act or change. Of a gloomy or surly disposition.'" A little smile came
across his face as he waited for the ripple of laughter. "Well," he con
cluded, "I don't think 'mercurial' is sobadafter all." After the applause,

NeXT

235

he used the quotations book to make a more subtle point, about his
reality distortion field. The quote he chose was from Lewis Carroll's
Through the Looking Glass. After Alice laments that no matter how

hard she tries she can't believe impossible things, the White Queen
retorts, "Why, sometimes I've believed as many as six impossible things
before breakfast." Especially from the front rows, there was a roar of
knowing laughter.

All ofthe good cheer served tosugarcoat, ordistract attention from,
the bad news. When it came time to announce the price of the new
machine, Jobs did what he would often do in product demonstrations:
reel off the features, describe them as being "worth thousands and
thousands ofdollars," and get the audience to imagine how expensive
it really should be. Then he announced what he hoped would seem
like alow price: "We're going to be charging higher education asingle
price of $6,500." From the faithful, there was scattered applause. But
his panel ofacademic advisors had long pushed tokeep the price tobe
tween $2,000 and $3,000, and they thought that Jobs had promised to
do so. Some ofthem were appalled. This was especially true once they
discovered that the optional printer would cost another $2,000, and
the slowness of the optical disk would make the purchase of a $2,500
external hard disk advisable.

There was another disappointment that he tried to downplay: "Early
next year, we will have our 0.9 release, which is for software developers
and aggressive end users." There was a bit ofnervous laughter. What
hewas saying was that the real release ofthe machine andits software,
known as the 1.0 release, would not actually be happening in early
1989. In fact hedidn't set a hard date. He merely suggested it would be
sometime in the second quarter of that year. At the first NeXT retreat

back in late 1985, he had refused to budge, despite Joanna Hoffman's
pushback, from his commitment tohave the machine finished in early
1987. Now it was clear it would be more than two years later.
The event ended on a more upbeat note, literally. Jobs brought on
stage a violinist from the San Francisco Symphony who played Bach's

AMinor Violin Concerto inaduet with the NeXT computer onstage.
People erupted injubilant applause. The price and the delayed release
were forgotten in the frenzy. When one reporter asked him immedi-

236

Walter Isaacson

ately afterward why the machine was going tobe so late, Jobs replied,
"It's not late. It's five years ahead of its time."
Aswould become his standard practice,Jobs offered to provide "ex
clusive" interviews to anointed publications in returnfor their promis

ing toput the story on the cover. This time he went one "exclusive" too
far, though it didn't really hurt. He agreed to a request from Business
Week's Katie Hafner for exclusive access to him before the launch, but
he also made a similar deal with Newsweek and then with Fortune.

What he didn't consider was that one of Fortunes top editors, Susan
Fraker, was married to NewsweeUs editorMaynard Parker. At the For

tune story conference, when they were talking excitedly about their
exclusive, Frakermentioned that shehappened to knowthat Newsweek

had also been promised anexclusive, and it would becoming outa few
days before Fortune. So Jobs ended up that week on only two maga
zine covers. Newsweek used the cover line "Mr. Chips" and showed

him leaning on a beautiful NeXT, which it proclaimed to be"the most
exciting machine in years." Business Week showed himlooking angelic
in a darksuit, fingertips pressed together like a preacher or professor.
But Hafner pointedly reported on the manipulation that surrounded
her exclusive. "NeXT carefully parceled out interviews with its staff
and suppliers, monitoring them with a censor's eye," she wrote. "That
strategy worked, but at a price: Such maneuvering—self-serving and
relentless—displayed the side ofSteve Jobs that sohurt himat Apple.
The trait that most stands out isJobs's need to control events."

When thehype died down, thereaction to theNeXT computer was
muted, especially since it was not yet commercially available. Bill Joy,
the brilliant and wry chief scientist at rival Sun Microsystems, called
it "the first Yuppie workstation," which was not an unalloyed com
pliment. Bill Gates, as might be expected, continued to be publicly
dismissive. "Frankly, I'm disappointed," he told the Wall StreetJournal.
"Back in 1981, we were truly excited by the Macintosh when Steve
showed it to us, because when you put it side-by-side with another
computer, it was unlike anything anybody had ever seen before." The
NeXT machine was not like that. "In the grand scope of things, most

of these features are truly trivial." He said that Microsoft would con
tinue its plans not to write software for the NeXT. Right after the an-

NeXT

237

nouncement event, Gates wrote aparody email to his staff. "All reality
has been completely suspended," it began. Looking back at it, Gates
laughs that it mayhave been "thebestemail I ever wrote."

When the NeXT computer finally went on sale in mid-1989, the
factory was primed to churn out ten thousand units a month. As it
turned out, saleswere about four hundred a month. The beautiful fac

tory robots, so nicely painted, remained mostly idle, and NeXT con
tinued to hemorrhage cash.

CHAPTER

NINETEEN

PIXAR
Technology Meets Art

Ed Catmull, SteveJobs, andJohnLasseter, 1999

Lucasfilms Computer Division
When Jobs was losing his footing at Apple in the summer of 1985,
he wentfor a walk withAlan Kay, who had been at Xerox PARC and
was then an Apple Fellow. Kay knew thatJobs was interested in the
intersection of creativity andtechnology, sohe suggested theygo see a
friend of his, Ed Catmull, whowas running the computer division of
George Lucas's film studio. They rented a limo and rode up to Marin
County to the edge of Lucas's Skywalker Ranch, where Catmull and
his little computer division were based. "I was blown away, andI came
238

Pixar

239

back and tried to convince Sculley to buy it for Apple," Jobs recalled.
"But the folks running Apple weren't interested, and they were busy
kicking me out anyway."
The Lucasfilm computer division made hardware and software for

rendering digital images, and it also had a group of computer anima
tors making shorts, which was led by a talented cartoon-loving execu
tive namedJohn Lasseter. Lucas, who had completed his first Star Wars
trilogy, was embroiled in a contentious divorce, and he needed to sell

offthe division. Hetold Catmull tofind abuyer as soon as possible.
After a few potential purchasers balked in the fall of 1985, Catmull
and his colleague Alvy Ray Smith decided to seek investors so that

they could buy the division themselves. So they called Jobs, arranged
another meeting, and drove down to his Woodside house. After railing
for a while about the perfidies and idiocies ofSculley, Jobs proposed
that he buy their Lucasfilm division outright. Catmull and Smith de
murred: They wantedan investor, not a newowner. But it soonbecame

clear that there was a middle ground: Jobs could buy a majority ofthe
division and serve as chairman but allow Catmull and Smith to run it.

"I wanted to buy it because I was really into computer graphics,"
Jobs recalled. "I realized they were way ahead of others in combin
ing art and technology, which is what I've always been interested in."
He offered to pay Lucas $5 million plus invest another $5 million to
capitalize thedivision as a stand-alone company. Thatwas far less than
Lucas had been asking, butthe timing was right. They decided to ne
gotiate a deal.

The chief financial officer at Lucasfilm found Jobs arrogant and
prickly, so when it came time to hold a meeting ofall the players, he
told Catmull, "We have to establish the right pecking order." The plan
was to gather everyone in a roomwithJobs, and then the CFO would

come in afew minutes late to establish that he was the person running
the meeting. "But a funny thing happened," Catmull recalled. "Steve
started the meeting on time without the CFO, and by the time the
CFO walked in Steve was already incontrol ofthe meeting."
Jobs met only once with George Lucas, who warned him that the
people in thedivision cared more about making animated movies than
they did about making computers. "You know, these guys are hell-bent

240

Walter Isaacson

on animation," Lucas told him. Lucas later recalled, "I did warn him

thatwas basically Ed and John's agenda. I think in his heart hebought
the company because thatwas his agenda too."
The final agreement was reached inJanuary 1986. It provided that,
for his $10 million investment, Jobs would own 70% of the company,
with the rest of the stock distributed to Ed Catmull,Alvy Ray Smith,

and thethirty-eight other founding employees, down to thereception
ist. The division's most important piece of hardware was called the
Pixar Image Computer, and from it the new company took its name.
For a while Jobs let Catmull and Smith run Pixar without much
interference. Every month or so they would gather for a board meet

ing, usually at NeXT headquarters, where Jobs would focus on the
finances and strategy. Nevertheless, by dint ofhis personality and con
trolling instincts, Jobs was soon playing astronger role. Hespewed out
a stream of ideas—some reasonable, others wacky—about what Pixar's
hardware and software could become. And on his occasional visits to

the Pixar offices, he was an inspiring presence. "I grew up a Southern

Baptist, and we had revival meetings with mesmerizing but corrupt
preachers," recounted Alvy Ray Smith. "Steve's got it: the power of
the tongue and the web of words that catches people up. We were
aware of this when we had board meetings, sowe developed signals—

nose scratching or ear tugs—for when someone had been caught up
in Steve's distortion field and he needed to be tugged backto reality."

Jobs had always appreciated the virtue ofintegrating hardware and
software, which iswhatPixar didwithitsImage Computer andrender

ing software. It also produced creative content, such as animated films
and graphics. All three elements benefited from Jobs's combination
of artistic creativity and technological geekiness. "Silicon Valley folks
don't really respect Hollywood creative types, and the Hollywood folks
think thattech folks are people you hire and never have to meet," Jobs
later said. "Pixar was one place where both cultures were respected."
Initially the revenue was supposed to come from the hardware
side. The Pixar Image Computer sold for $125,000. The primary cus
tomers were animators and graphic designers, but the machine also
soon found specialized markets in the medical industry (CAT scan
data could be rendered in three-dimensional graphics) and intelligence

Pixar

241

fields (for rendering information from reconnaissance flights and satel
lites). Because ofthe sales tothe National Security Agency, Jobs had to
get a security clearance, which must have been fun for the FBI agent
assigned to vet him. At one point, a Pixar executive recalled, Jobs was
called by the investigator to go over the drug use questions, which he
answered unabashedly. "Thelast time I used that...," hewould say, or
on occasion he would answer that no, he had actually never tried that
particular drug.

Jobs pushed Pixar to build a lower-cost version of the computer
that would sell for around $30,000. He insisted that Hartmut Ess

linger design it, despite protests by Catmull and Smith about his fees.
It ended up looking like the original Pixar Image Computer, which
was a cube with a round dimple in the middle, but it had Esslinger's
signature thin grooves.
Jobs wanted to sell Pixar's computers to a mass market, so he had
the Pixar folks open up sales offices—for which he approved the
design—in major cities, on the theory that creative people would soon
come up with all sorts of ways to use the machine. "My view is that
people are creative animals and will figure out clever new ways to use
tools that the inventor never imagined," he later said. "I thought that
would happen with the Pixar computer, just as it did with the Mac."
But the machine never took hold with regular consumers. It cost too
much, and there were not manysoftware programs for it.
On the software side, Pixar had a rendering program, known as

Reyes (Renders everything you ever saw), for making 3-D graphics
and images. AfterJobs became chairman, the company created a new
language and interface, named RenderMan, that it hoped would be
comea standardfor 3-D graphics rendering, just asAdobe's PostScript
was for laserprinting.
As he had with the hardware, Jobs decided that they should try
to find a mass market, rather than just a specialized one, for the soft
ware they made. He was never content to aim only at the corporate or
high-end specialized markets. "He would have these great visions of
how RenderMan couldbe for everyman," recalled Pam Kerwin, Pixar's
marketing director. "He kept coming up with ideas abouthowordinary
peoplewould use it to make amazing 3-D graphics and photorealistic

242

Walter Isaacson

images."The Pixar team would tryto dissuade himbysaying that Ren
derMan was not aseasy to use as, say, Excel or Adobe Illustrator. Then
Jobs would go to a whiteboard andshow themhow to make it simpler
and more user-friendly. "Wewould be nodding our heads and getting
excited and say, 'Yes, yes, this will be great!'" Kerwin recalled. "And
then he would leave and we would consider it for a moment and then

say, 'What the heck was he thinking!' He was so weirdly charismatic
that you almost hadto getdeprogrammed after you talked to him." As
it turned out, average consumers were not craving expensive software
that wouldlet them renderrealistic images. RenderMandidn't take off.
There was, however, one company that was eager to automate the
rendering of animators' drawings into color images for film. When Roy
Disneyled a board revolution at the company that his uncleWalt had
founded, the new CEO, Michael Eisner, asked what role he wanted.

Disney said that he would like to revive the company's venerable but
fading animation department. One of his first initiatives was to look
at ways to computerize the process, and Pixarwon the contract. It cre
ated a packageof customizedhardware and software known as CAPS,
Computer Animation Production System. It was first used in 1988
for the final scene of The Little Mermaid, in which KingTriton waves
good-bye to Ariel. Disney bought dozens of Pixar Image Computers
as CAPS became an integral part of its production.

Animation

The digital animation business at Pixar—the group that made litde
animated films—was originally just a sideline, its main purpose being
to show off the hardware and software of the company. It was run by
John Lasseter, a man whose childlike face and demeanor masked an

artistic perfectionism that rivaled that of Jobs. Born in Hollywood,
Lasseter grew up loving Saturday morning cartoon shows. In ninth
grade, he wrote a report on the history of Disney Studios, and he de
cided then how he wished to spend his life.
When he graduated from high school, Lasseter enrolled in the
animation program at the California Institute of the Arts, founded

Pixar

243

by Walt Disney. In his summers and spare time, he researched the
Disney archives and worked as a guide on the Jungle Cruise ride at
Disneyland. The latter experience taught him thevalue of timing and
pacing in telling a story, an important but difficult concept to master
when creating, frame byframe, animated footage. He won the Student
Academy Award for the short he made in his junior year, Lady and
the Lampy which showed his debt to Disney films and foreshadowed
his signature talent for infusing inanimate objects such as lamps with
human personalities. After graduation he took the job for which he
was destined: as an animator at Disney Studios.
Except it didn't work out. "Some of us younger guys wanted to
bring Star Wars-level quality to the art of animation, but we wereheld
in check," Lasseter recalled. "I got disillusioned, then I got caughtin a
feud between two bosses, and the headanimation guyfired me." So in
1984Ed Catmulland Alvy RaySmithwere able to recruithim to work
where Star Wars-level quality was being defined, Lucasfilm. It was not
certain that George Lucas, already worried about the cost of his com
puter division, would really approve of hiring a full-time animator, so
Lasseterwas given the title "interface designer."
AfterJobs came onto the scene, he and Lasseter beganto share their
passionfor graphic design. "I wasthe onlyguy at Pixarwho was an art
ist, so I bondedwith Steve over his design sense," Lassetersaid. He was
a gregarious, playful, and huggable man who wore flowery Hawaiian
shirts, kept his office cluttered withvintage toys, and loved cheeseburg
ers.Jobs was a prickly, whip-thin vegetarian who favored austere and
uncluttered surroundings. But they were actually well-suited for each
other. Lasseter was an artist, soJobs treated him deferentially, and Las
seter viewed Jobs, correctly, as a patron who could appreciate artistry
and knew howit could be interwoven with technology and commerce.
Jobs and Catmull decided that, in order to show off their hardware

and software, Lasseter shouldproduce another short animatedfilm in
1986 for SIGGRAPH, the annual computer graphics conference. At
the time, Lasseterwas using the Luxolamp on his desk as a model for
graphic rendering, and he decided to turn Luxo into a lifelike charac
ter. A friend's young childinspired him to add Luxo Jr., and he showed
a fewtest frames to another animator, who urgedhim to makesurehe

244

Walter Isaacson

toldastory. Lasseter said hewas making only ashort, but the animator
reminded him that a story can be told even in a few seconds. Lasseter
took the lessonto heart.Luxojr ended up being just overtwo minutes;

it told the tale of a parent lamp and a child lamp pushing a ball back
and forth until the ballbursts,to the child's dismay.
Jobs was so excited that he took time off from the pressures at

NeXT to fly down with Lasseter to SIGGRAPH, which was being
held in Dallas that August. "It was so hot and muggythat when we'd
walk outside the air hit us like a tennis racket," Lasseter recalled.

There were ten thousand people at the trade show, andJobs loved it.
Artistic creativity energized him, especially when it was connected to
technology.

There was a long line to get into the auditorium where the films
were beingscreened, soJobs, not oneto waithis turn, fast-talked their
way in first. Luxojr got a prolonged standing ovation andwas named
the best film. "Oh, wow!" Jobs exclaimed at the end. "I really get this,
I get what it's allabout." As he later explained, "Our film was the only
one that had art to it, not just good technology. Pixar was about mak
ing that combination,just asthe Macintosh had been."
Luxojr was nominated for anAcademy Award,andJobs flewdown
to Los Angeles to be there for the ceremony. It didn't win, but Jobs
became committed to making new animated shorts each year, even
though there was not much of a business rationale for doing so. As
times got tough at Pixar, he would sit through brutal budget-cutting
meetings showing no mercy. Then Lasseter would ask that the money
they hadjust saved be used for his next film, andJobs would agree.

Tin Toy
Not all ofJobs's relationships at Pixar were as good. His worst clash
came with Catmull's cofounder, Alvy Ray Smith. From a Baptist
background in rural north Texas, Smith became a free-spirited hip
pie computer imaging engineer with a big build, big laugh, and big
personality—and occasionally an ego to match. "Alvyjust glows, with
a high color, friendly laugh, and a whole bunch of groupies at confer-

Pixar

245

ences," saidPam Kerwin. "A personality like Alvy's was likely to ruffle
Steve. Theyare bothvisionaries andhigh energy and highego. Alvy is
not as willingto make peace and overlook things as Ed was."
Smith saw Jobs as someone whose charisma and ego led him to
abuse power. "He was like a televangelist," Smith said. "He wanted
to control people, but I would not be a slave to him, which is why
we clashed. Ed was much more able to go with the flow." Jobs would
sometimes assert his dominance at a meeting bysaying something out
rageous or untrue. Smith took great joy in calling him on it, and he
would do so with a large laugh and a smirk. This did not endear him
to Jobs.

One day at a board meeting, Jobs started berating Smith and
other top Pixar executives for the delay in getting the circuit boards
completed for the new version of the Pixar Image Computer. At the
time, NeXT was also very late in completing its own computer boards,
and Smith pointed that out: "Hey, you're even later with your NeXT
boards, soquitjumping onus."Jobs went ballistic, orin Smith's phrase,
"totally nonlinear." When Smith was feeling attacked or confronta
tional, he tended to lapse into his southwestern accent. Jobs started
parodying it in his sarcastic style. "It was a bully tactic, andI exploded
with everything I had," Smith recalled. "Before I knew it, we were in

each other's faces—about three inches apart—screaming at each other."
Jobs was very possessive about control of the whiteboard during a
meeting, so the burly Smith pushed pasthim andstarted writing on it.
"You can't do that!"Jobs shouted.

"What?" responded Smith, "I can't write on your whiteboard?
Bullshit." At that point Jobs stormed out.

Smith eventually resigned toform anew company to make software
for digital drawing and image editing. Jobs refused him permission to
use some code he had created while at Pixar, which further inflamed

their enmity. "Alvy eventually got what he needed," saidCatmull, "but
he was very stressed for a year and developed a lung infection." In the

end it worked out well enough; Microsoft eventually bought Smith's
company, giving him the distinction of being a founder of one com
pany that was sold to Jobs and another that was sold to Gates.

Ornery in the best of times, Jobs became particularly so when it

246

Walter Isaacson

became clear that all three Pixar endeavors—hardware, software, and

animated content—were losing money. "I'd get these plans, and in the
end I kept having to put in more money," he recalled. He would rail,
but then write the check. Having been ousted at Apple and flailing at
NeXT, he couldn't afford a third strike.

To stem the losses, he ordered a round of deep layoffs, which he
executed with his typical empathy deficiency. As Pam Kerwin put it,
he had "neither the emotional nor financial runway to be decent to
people he wasletting go." Jobs insisted that the firings be done imme
diately, with no severance pay. Kerwin tookJobs on a walkaround the
parking lot and begged that the employees be given at leasttwoweeks
notice. "Okay," he shot back, "but the notice is retroactive from two
weeks ago." Catmull was in Moscow, and Kerwin put in frantic calls
to him. When he returned, he was able to institute a meager severance
plan and calmthings downjust a bit.
At one point the members of the Pixar animation team were trying
to convince Intel to let them make some of its commercials, and Jobs

became impatient. During a meeting, in the midst of berating an Intel
marketing director, he picked up the phone and called CEO Andy
Grove directly. Grove, stillplaying mentor, tried to teachJobs a lesson:
He supported hisIntel manager. "I stuck bymyemployee," he recalled.
"Steve doesn't like to be treatedlike a supplier."
Grove also played mentorwhenJobs proposed that Pixar give Intel
suggestions on howto improve the capacity of its processors to render
3-D graphics. When the engineers at Intel accepted the offer, Jobs
sent an email back saying Pixarwould need to be paid for its advice.
Intel's chiefengineer replied, "We have not entered into any financial
arrangement in exchange forgood ideas for our microprocessors in the
past and have no intention for the future." Jobs forwarded the answer
to Grove, saying that he found the engineer's response to be "extremely
arrogant, given Intel's dismal showing in understanding computer
graphics." Grove sentJobs a blistering reply, saying that sharing ideas is
"what friendly companies and friends do for each other." Grove added
that he had oftenfreely shared ideas withJobsin the past and that Jobs
should not be so mercenary. Jobs relented. "I havemanyfaults, but one

Pixar

247

ofthem is notingratitude," he responded. "Therefore, I have changed
my position 180 degrees—we will freely help. Thanks for the clearer
perspective."

Pixar was able to create some powerful software products aimed at
average consumers, or at least those average consumers who shared

Jobs's passion for designing things. Jobs still hoped that the ability
to make super-realistic 3-D images at home would become part of
the desktop publishing craze. Pixar's Showplace, for example, allowed
users to change the shadings on the 3-D objects they created so that
theycould display themfrom various angles withappropriate shadows.
Jobs thought it was incredibly compelling, but most consumers were
contentto live withoutit. It was a case where his passions misled him:
The software hadso many amazing features that it lacked the simplic
ityJobs usually demanded. Pixar couldn't compete with Adobe, which
was making software that was less sophisticated but far less compli
cated and expensive.
EvenasPixar's hardware and software productlinesfoundered, Jobs
kept protectingthe animation group. It had become for him a little is
land of magical artistrythat gave him deepemotional pleasure, and he
was willing to nurture it and bet on it. In the spring of 1988 cashwas
running so short that he convened a meeting to decree deep spending
cuts across the board. When it was over, Lasseter and his animation

group were almost too afraid to askJobs about authorizing some extra
money for anothershort. Finally, theybroached the topic andJobs sat
silent, looking skeptical. It would require close to $300,000 moreout of
hispocket. Aftera few minutes, he asked if there were anystoryboards.
Catmull took him down to the animation offices, and once Lasseter
started his show—displaying hisboards, doing the voices, showing his
passion for his product—Jobs startedto warm up.
The story was about Lasseter's love, classic toys. It was told from
the perspective of a toyone-man band named Tinny, whomeets a baby
that charms andterrorizes him. Escaping under the couch, Tinnyfinds
otherfrightened toys, but when the baby hitshisheadand cries, Tinny
goes backout to cheerhim up.

248

Walter Isaacson

Jobs said he would provide the money. "I believed in whatJohn was
doing," he later said. "It was art. He cared, and I cared. I always said
yes." His only comment at the endof Lasseter's presentation was, "All
I ask of you, John, is to make it great."
Tin Toy went on to win the 1988 Academy Award for animated
short films, the first computer-generated film to do so. To celebrate,
Jobs took Lasseter and his team to Greens, a vegetarian restaurant in

San Francisco. Lasseter grabbed the Oscar, whichwas in the center of
the table,held it aloft,and toastedJobs by saying, "All you askedis that
we make a great movie."
The new team at Disney—Michael Eisner the CEO and Jeffrey
Katzenberg in the film division—began a questto get Lasseter to come
back. They liked Tin Toy, and theythought that something morecould
be done with animated stories of toys that come alive and have human
emotions. But Lasseter, gratefulfor Jobs's faith in him, felt that Pixar
was the only place where he could create a new world of computergenerated animation. He told Catmull, "I can go to Disney and be a
director, or I can stay here and make history." So Disney began talk
ing about making a production dealwith Pixar. "Lasseter's shorts were
really breathtaking both in storytelling and in the use of technology,"
recalled Katzenberg. "I tried so hard to get him to Disney, but he was
loyal to Steve and Pixar. So if you can't beat them, join them. We de
cided to look for ways we could join up with Pixar and have them
make a film about toysfor us."
By this point Jobs had poured close to $50 million of his own
moneyinto Pixar—more than half of what he had pocketedwhen he

cashed out of Apple—and he was stilllosing money at NeXT. He was
hard-nosed about it; he forced all Pixar employees to give up their
options as part of his agreement to add another round of personal
funding in 1991. But he was also a romantic in his love for what art
istry and technology could do together. His beliefthat ordinary con
sumers would love to do 3-D modeling on Pixar software turned out
to be wrong, but that was soon replaced by an instinct that turned
out to be right: that combininggreat art and digital technologywould
transform animated films more than anything had since 1937, when
Walt Disney had givenlife to SnowWhite.

Pixar

249

Looking back,Jobs said that, had he known more, he would have
focused on animation soonerand not worriedabout pushing the com
pany's hardware or software applications. On the other hand, had he
known the hardware and software would never be profitable, he would
not have taken overPixar. "Lifekind of snookered me into doing that,
and perhaps it was for the better."

CHAPTER

TWENTY

A REGULAR GUY
Love Is Just a Four-Letter Word

Mona Simpson andherfiance, RichardAppel, 1991

Joan Baez
In 1982, when he was still working on the Macintosh, Jobs met the
famed folksinger Joan Baez through her sister Mimi Farina, who
headed a charity that was trying to get donations of computers for
prisons. A few weeks later he and Baez had lunch in Cupertino. "I
wasn't expecting a lot, but shewas really smartand funny," he recalled.
At the time, he was nearing the end of his relationship with Barbara
Jasinski. They had vacationed in Hawaii, shared a house in the Santa
Cruz mountains, and evengone to one of Baez's concerts together. As
his relationship with Jasinski flamed out,Jobs begangetting more seri250

A Regular Guy

251

ous with Baez. He was twenty-seven and Baezwas forty-one, but for
a few years they had a romance. "It turned into a serious relationship
between two accidental friends who became lovers,"Jobs recalled in a
somewhat wistful tone.

Elizabeth Holmes,Jobss friend from Reed College, believed that
one of the reasons he went out with Baez—other than the fact that

she wasbeautifiil and funnyand talented—was that she had oncebeen
the lover of Bob Dylan. "Steve loved that connection to Dylan," she
latersaid. Baez and Dylanhad been lovers in the early 1960s, and they
toured asfriends after that, including with the Rolling Thunder Revue
in 1975. (Jobs had the boodegs of those concerts.)
When she met Jobs, Baez had a fourteen-year-old son, Gabriel,
from her marriage to the antiwar activist David Harris. At lunch she
told Jobs she was trying to teach Gabe how to type. "You mean on a
typewriter?" Jobs asked. When she said yes, he replied, "But a type
writer is antiquated."
"If a typewriter is antiquated, what does that make me?" she asked.
There was an awkward pause. As Baez later told me,"As soon as I said
it, I realized the answer was so obvious. The question just hung in the
air.I was just horrified."
Much to the astonishment of the Macintosh team, Jobs burst into
the office one day with Baez and showed her the prototype of the
Macintosh. They were dumbfounded that he would reveal the com
puter to an outsider, given his obsession with secrecy, but they were
even more blown away to be in the presence of Joan Baez. He gave
Gabe an Apple II, and he latergave Baez a Macintosh. On visits Jobs
would show off the features he liked. "He was sweet and patient, but
he was so advanced in his knowledge that he had trouble teaching
me," she recalled.
He was a sudden multimillionaire; she was a world-famous celeb

rity, but sweetly down-to-earth and not all that wealthy. She didnt
know what to make of him then, and still found him puzzling when
she talked about him almost thirtyyears later. At one dinner early in
their relationship, Jobs started talking about Ralph Lauren and his
Polo Shop, which she admitted she had nevervisited."There's a beau
tiful red dress there that would be perfect for you," he said, and then

252

Walter Isaacson

drove her to the store in the Stanford Mall. Baez recalled, "I said to

myself, far out, terrific, I'm with one of the world's richest men and he
wants me to havethis beautifiil dress." When they got to the store,Jobs
bought a handful of shirts for himself and showed her the red dress.
"You ought to buy it," he said. She was a litde surprised, and told him
she couldn't reallyafford it. He said nothing, and they left. "Wouldn't
you think if someone had talked like that the whole evening, that they
weregoingto get it for you?" she asked me,seeming genuinely puzzled
about the incident."The mystery of the red dress is in your hands.I felt
a bit strange about it." He would give her computers, but not a dress,
and when he brought her flowers he made sure to say they were left
over from an event in the office. "He was both romantic and afraid to

be romantic," she said.

When he was working on the NeXT computer, he went to Baez's
house in Woodside to showher howwellit could produce music. "He
had it play a Brahms quartet, and he told me eventually computers
would sound better than humansplaying it, evenget the innuendo and
the cadences better," Baez recalled. She was revolted by the idea. "He
was working himself up into a fervor of delight while I was shrinking
into a rage and thinking,How could you defile music like that?"
Jobs would confide in Debi Coleman and Joanna Hoffman about

his relationship with Baez and worry about whether he could marry
someone who had a teenage son and was probably past the point of
wanting to have more children. "At times he would belittle her as
being an 'issues' singerand not a true 'political' singerlike Dylan,"said
Hoffman. "She was a strongwoman,and he wanted to show he was in
control. Plus, he always saidhe wantedto have a family, and with her
he knew that he wouldn't."

And so, after about three years, they ended their romance and
drifted into becoming just friends. "I thought I was in love with her,
but I really just liked her a lot," he later said. "We weren't destined to
be together. I wanted kids, and she didn'twant any more." In her 1989
memoir, Baezwrote about her breakup with her husband and why she
never remarried: "I belonged alone, which is how I have been since
then, with occasional interruptions that are mostly picnics." She did

A Regular Guy

253

add a nice acknowledgment at the end of the book to "Steve Jobs for
forcing me to use a word processor by putting one in my kitchen."

FindingJoanne andMona
When Jobs was thirty-one, a year after his ouster from Apple, his
mother Clara, who was a smoker, was stricken with lung cancer. He
spent time by her deathbed, talking to her in ways he had rarely done
in the past and asking some questions he had refrained from raising
before. "When youand Dad got married, were you a virgin?" he asked.
It was hard for her to talk, but she forced a smile. That's when she told
him that she had been married before, to a man who never made it
back from the war. She also filled in some of the details of how she and

PaidJobs had come to adopt him.
Soon after that, Jobs succeeded in tracking down the woman who

had put him up for adoption. His quietquest to find her had begun in
the early 1980s, when he hired a detective who had failed to come up
with anything. Then Jobs noticed the name of a San Francisco doc
tor on his birth certificate. "He was in the phone book, so I gave him
a call," Jobs recalled. The doctor was no help. He claimed that his
records had been destroyed in a fire. That was not true. In fact, right
afterJobs called,the doctor wrote a letter, sealedit in an envelope, and
wrote on it, "To be delivered to SteveJobs on my death." When he
died a short time later, his widow sent the letter to Jobs. In it, the doc

tor explained that his motherhad beenan unmarried graduate student
from Wisconsin named Joanne Schieble.
It took another few weeks and the work of another detective

to track her down. After giving him up,Joanne had married his bio
logical father, Abdulfattah "John" JandaU, and they had another child,
Mona. Jandali abandoned them five years later, and Joanne married a
colorful ice-skating instructor, George Simpson. That marriage didn't
last long either,and in 1970 she begana meandering journey that took
her and Mona (both of them now using the last name Simpson) to
Los Angeles.

254

Walter Isaacson

Jobs hadbeen reluctant to let Paul and Clara, whom he considered
his real parents, know about his search for his birth mother. With a
sensitivity that was unusual for him, and which showed the deep af
fection he felt for his parents, heworried that they might be offended.
So he never contacted Joanne Simpson until after Clara Jobs died in
early 1986. "I never wanted them to feel like I didn't consider them
myparents, because they were totally my parents," he recalled. "I loved
them so much that I never wanted them to know of my search, and
I even had reporters keep it quietwhenanyof them found out."When
Clara died, he decided to tell PaulJobs,who was perfecdycomfortable
and said he didn't mind at all if Steve made contact with his biological
mother.

So one dayJobs called Joanne Simpson, said who he was, and ar
ranged to come down to Los Angeles to meet her. He later claimed
it was mainly out of curiosity. "I believe in environment more than
heredityin determiningyourtraits,but stillyou haveto wonder a little
about your biological roots," he said. He also wanted to reassure Joanne
that what she had done was allright. "I wanted to meet mybiological
mother mosdy to see if she was okay and to thank her, because I'm
gladI didn'tend up asan abortion. Shewas twenty-three and shewent
through a lot to have me."
Joanne was overcome with emotion when Jobs arrived at her Los
Angeles house. She knew he was famous and rich, but she wasn't ex
actly surewhy. She immediately began to pour out her emotions. She
had beenpressured to signthe papers putting him up for adoption, she
said, and did so onlywhen told that he was happyin the house of his
new parents. She had always missed him and suffered about what she
had done. She apologized over and over, even asJobs kept reassuring
her that he understood, and that things had turned out just fine.
Once she calmed down, she told Jobs that he had a full sister, Mona

Simpson, who was then an aspiring novelist in Manhattan. She had
never told Mona that she had a brother, and that day she broke the
news, or at least part of it, by telephone. "You have a brother, and he's
wonderful, and he's famous, and I'm going to bring him to New York
so you can meet him," she said.Mona was in the throes of finishing a
novelabout her mother and their peregrinationfrom Wisconsin to Los

A Regular Guy

255

Angeles, Anywhere butHere. Those who've read it will notbesurprised
that Joanne was somewhat quirky in the way she imparted to Mona
the news about herbrother. She refused to say who he was—only that
he had been poor, had gotten rich, was good-looking and famous, had
long dark hair, and lived in California. Mona then worked at the Paris

Review, George Plimpton's literaryjournal housed on the ground floor
of his townhouse near Manhattan's East River. She and her coworkers

began a guessing game on who her brother might be.John Travolta?
That was one of the favorite guesses. Other actors were also hot pros
pects. At one point someone did toss out a guess that "maybe it's one
of those guys who started Apple computer," but no one could recall
their names.

The meeting occurred in the lobby of the St. Regis Hotel. "He was
totally straightforward andlovely, just a normal and sweet guy," Mona
recalled. They all sat and talked for a few minutes, then he took his
sisterfor a longwalk, just the twoof them.Jobswas thrilledto find that
he had a sibling who was so similar to him.They were both intense in
their artistry, observant of their surroundings, and sensitive yet strongwilled. When they went to dinner together, they noticed the same
architectural details and talked about them excitedly afterward. "My
sister's a writer!" he exulted to colleagues at Apple when he found out.
When Plimpton threwa partyforAnywhere but Here in late 1986,
Jobs flew to New York to accompany Mona to it. They grew increas
ingly close, though their friendship had the complexities that might be
expected, considering who theywere and howtheyhad come together.
"Mona was not completely thrilled at first to have me in her life and
have her mother so emotionally affectionate toward me," he later said.

"As wegot to know each other, webecame really good friends, and she
is my family. I don't know what I'd do without her. I can't imagine a
better sister. My adopted sister, Patty, and I were never close." Mona
Ukewise developed a deep affection forhim, andat times could be very
protective, although she would later write an edgy novel about him,
A Regular Guy, that described his quirks with discomforting accuracy.
One of the few things they would argue about was her clothes.
She dressed like a struggling novelist, and he would berate her for not
wearing clothes that were "fetching enough." At one point his com-

256

Walter Isaacson

ments so annoyed her that shewrotehim a letter:"I am a youngwriter,
and this is mylife, and I'm not trying to be a model anyway." He didn't
answer. But shordy after, a boxarrived from the store of IsseyMiyake,
the Japanese fashion designer whose starkand technology-influenced
style made him one ofJobs's favorites. "He'd gone shopping for me,"
shelatersaid, "andhe'dpicked out greatthings, exacdy mysize, in flat
tering colors." There was one pantsuit that he had particularly liked,
and the shipmentincluded three of them, all identical. "I still remem
ber those first suits I sent Mona,"he said. "They were linen pants and
topsin a pale grayish green that looked beautiful with her reddish hair."

The Lost Father

In the meantime, Mona Simpson had been trying to track down their
father, who had wanderedoffwhen shewasfive. Through Ken Auletta
and Nick Pileggi, prominent Manhattan writers, she was introduced
to a retired New York cop who had formed his own detective agency.
"I paid him what litde money I had," Simpson recalled, but the search
was unsuccessful. Then she met another privateeyein California, who
was able to find an address for Abdulfattah Jandali in Sacramento

through a Department of Motor Vehicles search. Simpson told her
brother and flew out from New York to see the man who was appar
ently their father.
Jobs had no interest in meeting him. "He didn't treat me well," he
later explained. "I don't hold anything against him—I'm happy to be
alive. But what bothers me most is that he didn't treat Mona well.

He abandoned her." Jobs himselfhad abandoned his own illegitimate
daughter, Lisa, and now was trying to restore their relationship, but
that complexity did not soften his feelings toward Jandali. Simpson
went to Sacramento alone.

"It was veryintense," Simpson recalled. She found her fatherwork
ing in a small restaurant. He seemed happy to see her,yet oddly pas
sive about the entire situation. They talked for a few hours, and he
recounted that, after he left Wisconsin, he had drifted away from
teaching and gotten into the restaurantbusiness.

A Regular Guy

257

Jobs had asked Simpson not to mention him, so she didn't. But at
one point her father casually remarked that he and her mother had

had another baby, a boy, before she had been born. "What happened
to him?" she asked. He replied, "We'll never see that baby again. That
baby's gone." Simpson recoiled but said nothing.
An even more astonishing revelation occurred when Jandali was
describing the previous restaurants that he had run. There had been
some nice ones, he insisted, fancier than the Sacramento joint they

were then sitting in. He told her, somewhat emotionally, that he
wished she could have seen him when he was managing a Mediter
ranean restaurant north of SanJose. "That was a wonderfid place," he
said. "All of the successful technology people used to come there. Even
SteveJobs" Simpson was stunned. "Oh, yeah, he used to come in, and
he was a sweet guy, and a big tipper," her father added. Mona was able
to refrain from blurting out, SteveJobs isyour son!
When the visit was over, she called Jobs surreptitiously from the
pay phone at the restaurant and arranged to meet him at the Espresso
Roma cafe in Berkeley. Adding to the personal and family drama, he
brought along Lisa, now in grade school, who lived with her mother,
Chrisann. When they all arrived atthecafe, it was close to 10p.m., and
Simpson poured forth the tale. Jobs was understandably astonished
when she mentioned the restaurant near San Jose. He could recall

being there and even meeting the man who was his biological father.
"It was amazing," he later said of the revelation. "I had been to that
restaurant a few times, and I remember meeting the owner. He was
Syrian. Balding. We shook hands."
Nevertheless Jobs still had no desire to see him. "I was a wealthy
man by then, and I didn't trust him not to try to blackmail me or
go to the press about it," he recalled. "I asked Mona not to tell him
about me."

She never did, but years later Jandali saw his relationship to Jobs
mentioned online. (A blogger noticed that Simpson had listed Jandali
asherfather in a reference bookandfigured out he mustbeJobs's father
as well.) BythenJandali was married for a fourth time andworking as
a food and beverage manager at the Boomtown Resort and Casino just
westof Reno, Nevada. When he broughthis newwife, Roscille, to visit

258

Walter Isaacson

Simpson in 2006, he raised the topic. "Whatis this thingabout Steve
Jobs?" he asked. She confirmed the story, but added that she thought
Jobs had no interest in meeting him. Jandali seemed to accept that.
"Myfather is thoughtful and a beautiful storyteller, but he isvery, very
passive," Simpson said. "He never contacted Steve."
Simpson turned her search for Jandali into a basis for her second
novel, The Lost Father, published in 1992. (Jobs convinced PaulRand,
the designer who did the NeXT logo, to design the cover, but accord
ing to Simpson, "It was God-awful and we never used it.") She also
tracked down various members of the Jandali family, in Horns and in
America, and in 2011 was writing a novel abouther Syrian roots. The

Syrian ambassador inWashington threw a dinner forher that included
a cousin and his wife who then lived in Florida and had flown up for
the occasion.

Simpson assumed that Jobs would eventually meetJandali, but as
time went on he showed even less interest. In 2010, when Jobs and his

son, Reed, went to a birthday dinner for Simpson at her Los Ange
les house, Reed spent some time looking at pictures of his biological
grandfather, butJobs ignored them. Nor did he seem to care about his
Syrian heritage. When the Middle East would come up in conversa
tion, the topic did not engage him or evoke his typical strong opinions,
even after Syria was swept up in the 2011 Arab Spring uprisings. "I
don'tthink anybody really knows whatweshould be doingover there,"
he said when I asked whether the Obama administration should be

intervening more in Egypt, Libya, and Syria. "You're fucked if you do
and you're fucked if you don't."
Jobs did retain a friendly relationship with his biological mother,
Joanne Simpson. Over the years she and Mona would often spend
Christmas at Jobs's house.The visits could be sweet, but also emotion

ally draining. Joanne would sometimes break into tears, say howmuch
she had loved him, and apologize for giving him up. It turned out all
right, Jobs would reassure her. As he told her one Christmas, "Don't
worry. I had a great childhood. I turned out okay."

A Regular Guy

259

Lisa

LisaBrennan, however, did not have a greatchildhood. When shewas
young, her father almost never came to see her. "I didn't want to be a

father, so I wasn't," Jobs latersaid, with only a touch of remorse in his
voice. Yet occasionally he felt the tug. One day, when Lisa was three,
Jobs was driving near the house he had bought for her and Chrisann,
and he decided to stop. Lisa didn't know who he was. He sat on the
doorstep, not venturing inside, and talked to Chrisann. The scene was
repeated once or twice a year. Jobs would come by unannounced, talk
a litde bit about Lisa's school options or other issues, then drive off in
his Mercedes.

Butbythetime Lisa turned eight, in 1986, thevisits were occurring
more frequendy. Jobs was no longer immersed in the grueling push to
create the Macintosh or in the subsequent power struggles with Scul
ley. He was at NeXT, which was calmer, friendlier, and headquartered
in Palo Alto, near where Chrisann and Lisa lived. In addition, by the
time she was in third grade, it was clear that Lisa was a smart and
artistic kid, who had already been singled out by her teachers for her
writing ability. She was spunky and high-spirited and had a litde of
her father's defiant attitude. She also looked a bit like him, with arched

eyebrows and a faindy Middle Eastern angularity. One day, to the sur
prise of his colleagues, he brought her by the office. As she turned
cartwheels in the corridor, she squealed, "Lookat me!"
Avie Tevanian, a lanky and gregarious engineer at NeXTwho had
become Jobs's friend, remembers that every now and then, when they
were going out to dinner, they would stop byChrisann's house to pick

up Lisa. "Hewas very sweet to her," Tevanian recalled. "Hewas a veg
etarian, and so was Chrisann, but she wasn't. He was fine with that. He

suggested she order chicken, and she did."

Eating chicken became her little indulgence as she shuttled be
tween twoparents whowere vegetarians with a spiritual regard for nat
ural foods. "We bought ourgroceries—our puntarella, quinoa, celeriac,
carob-covered nuts—in yeasty-smelling stores where the women didn't
dye their hair,"she later wrote about her time with her mother. "But we

260

Walter Isaacson

sometimes tastedforeign treats. A few times weboughta hot, seasoned
chicken from a gourmetshopwith rows and rows of chickens turning
on spits, and ate it in the car from the foil-lined paper bag with our
fingers." Her father, whose dietary fixations came in fanatic waves, was
more fastidious aboutwhat he ate. Shewatchedhim spit out a mouth
fulofsoup oneday after learning that it contained butter. Afterloosen
ing up a bit while at Apple, he was back to being a strict vegan. Even
at a young age Lisa began to realize his diet obsessions reflected a life
philosophy, one in which asceticism and minimalism could heighten
subsequent sensations. "He believed that great harvests came from arid
sources, pleasure from restraint," she noted. "He knew the equations
that most people didn't know: Things ledto theiropposites."
In a similar way, the absence and coldness of her father made his
occasional moments of warmth so much more intensely gratifying.
"I didn't live with him, but he would stop by our house some days,
a deity among us for a few tingling moments or hours," she recalled.
Lisa soon became interesting enough that he would take walks with
her. He would also go roUerblading with her on the quiet streets of
old Palo Alto, often stopping at the houses of Joanna Hoffman and
Andy Hertzfeld. The first time he brought her around to see Hoff
man, he just knocked on the door and announced, "This is Lisa."
Hoffman knewright away. "It was obvious she was his daughter," she
told me. "Nobody has that jaw. It's a signature jaw." Hoffman, who
suffered from not knowing her own divorced father until she was ten,
encouraged Jobs to be a better father. He followed her advice, and
later thanked her for it.

Once he took Lisa on a business trip to Tokyo, and they stayed
at the sleek and businesslike Okura Hotel. At the elegant downstairs
sushi bar,Jobs ordered large trays of unagi sushi, a dish he loved so
much that he allowed the warm cooked eel to pass muster as vegetar

ian.The pieces were coated with fine salt or a thin sweet sauce, and
Lisa remembered later how they dissolved in her mouth. So, too, did
the distance between them. As she later wrote, "It was the first time

I'd felt, with him, so relaxed and content, over those trays of meat;

the excess, the permission and warmth after the cold salads, meant a

A Regular Guy

261

once inaccessible space had opened. He was less rigid with himself,
even human under the great ceilings with the litde chairs, with the
meat, and me."

But it was not always sweetness and light. Jobs was as mercurial
with Lisa as he was with almost everyone, cycling between embrace
and abandonment. On one visit he would be playful; on the next he
would becold; often hewas notthere at all. "She was always unsure of
their relationship," according to Hertzfeld. "Iwent to a birthday party
of hers, and Steve was supposed to come, and he was very, very, late.
She gotextremely anxious and disappointed. But when he finally did
come, she totallylit up."

Lisa learned to be temperamental in return. Over the years their
relationship would bea roller coaster, with each ofthelow points elon
gated by their shared stubbornness. After a falling-out, they could go
for months not speaking to each other. Neither onewas good at reach
ing out, apologizing, or making the effort to heal, even when he was
wrestling with repeated health problems. One day in the fall of 2010

he was wistfully going through a box of old snapshots with me, and
paused over one that showed him visiting Lisa when she was young.
"I probably didn't go over there enough," he said. Since he had not
spokento her all that year, I asked if he might want to reach out to her
with a callor email. He looked at me blankly for a moment,then went
backto riffling through other old photographs.

The Romantic

When it came to women, Jobs could be deeply romantic. He tended
to fall in love dramatically, share with friends every up and down of a
relationship, and pine in public whenever he was away from his current
girlfriend. In the summer of 1983 he went to a small dinner party in
Silicon Valley withJoan Baez and sat next to an undergraduate at the
University of Pennsylvania named Jennifer Egan, who was not quite
sure who he was. By then he and Baez had realized that they weren't
destined to be forever young together, and Jobs found himself fasci-

262

Walter Isaacson

nated byEgan, who was working ona San Francisco weekly during her
summer vacation. He tracked her down, gave her a call, and took her

to Cafe Jacqueline, a litde bistro near Telegraph Hill that specialized
in vegetarian souffles.

They dated for a year, and Jobs often flew east to visit her. At a
Boston Macworld event, he told a large gathering how much in love
he was and thus needed to rush out to catch a plane for Philadel

phia to see his girlfriend. The audience, was enchanted. When hewas
visiting New York, she would take the train up to stay with him at the
Carlyle or at Jay Chiat's Upper East Side apartment, and theywould
eat at Cafe Luxembourg, visit (repeatedly) the apartment in the San
Remo hewas planning to remodel, and goto movies or (once at least)
the opera.

He and Egan also spoke for hours on the phone manynights. One
topic they wresded with was his belief, which came from his Bud
dhist studies, that it was important to avoid attachment to material
objects. Our consumer desires are unhealthy, he told her, and to attain
enlightenment you need to develop a life of nonattachment and nonmaterialism. He evensent her a tape of Kobun Chino, his Zen teacher,
lecturing about the problems caused by craving and obtainingthings.
Egan pushed back. Wasn't he defying that philosophy, she asked, by
making computers and other products that people coveted? "He was
irritated by the dichotomy, and we had exuberant debates about it,"
Egan recalled.
In the end Jobs's pride in the objects he made overcame his sensi
bility that people should eschew being attached to such possessions.
When the Macintosh came out in January 1984, Egan was staying at
her mother's apartmentin San Francisco during her winter breakfrom
Penn. Her mother's dinner guests were astonished one night when
Steve Jobs—suddenly very famous—appeared at the door carrying a
freshly boxed Macintosh and proceeded to Egan's bedroom to set it up.
Jobs told Egan, as he had a few other friends, about his premoni
tion that he wouldnot live a longlife. That waswhyhe wasdriven and
impatient, he confided. "He felta sense of urgency aboutallhe wanted
to get done," Egan later said. Their relationship tapered off by the fall

A Regular Guy

263

of 1984, when Egan made it clear that she was still far too young to
think of getting married.

Shordy after that, just as the turmoil with Sculley was beginning to
build at Apple in early 1985, Jobs was heading to a meeting when
he stopped at the office of a guy who was working with the Apple
Foundation, which helped get computers to nonprofit organizations.
Sitting in his office was a lithe, very blond woman who combined a

hippie aura of natural purity withthe solid sensibilities of a computer
consultant. Her name was Tina Redse. "She was the most beautifid

woman I'd ever seen,"Jobs recalled.

He called her the next day and asked her to dinner. She said no,
that she was living with aboyfriend. A few days later he took heron a
walk to a nearby park and again asked her out, and this time she told

her boyfriend that she wanted to go. She was very honest and open.
After dinner she started to crybecause she knew herlifewas about to
be disrupted. And it was. Within a few months she had moved into

theunfurnished mansion inWoodside. "She was the first person I was
truly in love with," Jobs later said. "We had avery deep connection. I
don'tknow that anyone will ever understand me better than she did."
Redse came from a troubled family, and Jobs shared with her his
own pain about being put up for adoption. "We were both wounded
from our childhood," Redse recalled. "He said to me that we were

misfits, which is why we belonged together." They were physically
passionate and prone to public displays of affection; their make-out

sessions in the NeXT lobby are well remembered by employees. So
too were their fights, which occurred at movie theaters and in front

ofvisitors toWoodside. Yet heconstandy praised her purity and natu
ralness. As thewell-grounded Joanna Hoffman pointed outwhen dis
cussing Jobs's infatuation with the otherworldly Redse, "Steve had a
tendency to look at vulnerabilities and neuroses and turn them into
spiritual attributes."

When he was being eased out at Apple in 1985, Redse traveled

with him in Europe, where he was salving his wounds. Standing on a
bridge over the Seine one evening, theybandied about the idea, more

264

Walter Isaacson

romantic than serious, of just staying in France, maybe settling down,
perhaps indefinitely. Redse was eager, butJobs didn't want to. He was
burned but still ambitious. "I am a reflection ofwhat I do," he told her.

She recalled their Paris moment in a poignant email she sent to him
twenty-five years later, after they hadgone their separate ways but re
tained their spiritualconnection:
We were on a bridge in Paris in the summer of 1985. It was overcast.
We leaned against the smooth stone rail and stared at the green water
rolling on below. Your world hadcleaved andthen it paused, waiting to
rearrange itselfaround whatever you chose next. I wanted to run away
from what had come before. I tried to convince you to begin a new
life with me in Paris, to shed our former selves and let something else

course through us. I wanted us to crawl through that black chasm of
your broken world and emerge, anonymous and new, in simple lives
where I could cook you simple dinners andwe could be together every
day, like children playing a sweet game with no purpose save the game
itself. I like to think you considered it before you laughed and said
"What could I do? IVe made myself unemployable." I like to thinkthat
in that moment's hesitation before our bold futures reclaimed us, we

lived thatsimple life together alltheway intoourpeaceful oldages, with
a brood of grandchildren around us on a farm in the south of France,
quiedy going about our days, warm and complete like loaves of fresh
bread, our small worldfilled with the aroma of patience and familiarity.

The relationship lurched up and down for five years. Redse hated
living in his sparsely furnished Woodside house. Jobs had hired a hip
young couple, who hadonce worked at Chez Panisse, as housekeepers
and vegetarian cooks, and they made her feel like an interloper. She
would occasionally move outto anapartment ofher own in Palo Alto,
especially after one of her torrential arguments with Jobs. "Neglect is
a form of abuse," she once scrawled on the wallof the hallway to their

bedroom. She was entranced by him, but she was also baffled by how
uncaring he could be. She would later recall how incredibly painful it
was to be in love with someone so self-centered. Caring deeplyabout

A Regular Guy

265

someone who seemed incapable of caring was a particular kindof hell
that shewouldn't wish on anyone, she said.
They were different in so many ways. "On the spectrum ofcruel to
kind, theyare close to the opposite poles," Hertzfeld latersaid. Redse's

kindness was manifest inways large and small; she always gave money
to street people, she volunteered to help those who (like her father)
were afflicted with mental illness, and she took care to make Lisa

and even Chrisann feel comfortable with her. More than anyone, she
helped persuade Jobs to spend more time with Lisa. But she lacked
Jobs's ambition and drive. The ethereal quality that made her seem so
spiritual toJobs also made it hard for them to stay on the same wave
length. "Their relationship was incredibly tempestuous," said Hertz
feld. "Because ofbothoftheir characters, they would have lots andlots
of fights."

They also had a basic philosophical difference about whether aes
thetic tastes were fundamentally individual, as Redse believed, or uni

versal and could be taught, as Jobs believed. She accused him ofbeing
too influenced by the Bauhaus movement. "Steve believed it was our

job to teach people aesthetics, to teach people what they should like,"
she recalled. "I don't share that perspective. I believe when we listen
deeply, both within ourselves and to each other, we are able to allow
what's innate and true to emerge."

When they were together for a long stretch, things did not work
out well. But when they were apart, Jobs would pine for her. Finally, in
the summer of 1989, he asked her to marry him. She couldn't do it. It
would drive her crazy, she told friends. She had grown up in a volatile
household, and her relationship with Jobs bore too many similarities
to that environment. Theywere opposites who attracted, she said, but
the combination was too combustible. "I could not have been a good
wife to 'Steve Jobs,' theicon," she later explained. "Iwould have sucked
at it on many levels. In our personal interactions, I couldn't abide his

unkindness. I didn't want tohurt him, yet I didn't want tostand by and
watch him hurt other people either. It was painful and exhausting."
After they broke up, Redse helped found OpenMind, a mental
health resource network in California. She happened to read in a psy-

266

Walter Isaacson

chiatric manual about Narcissistic Personality Disorder and decided

that Jobs perfecdy met the criteria. "It fits so well and explained so
much of what we had struggled with, that I realized expecting him to
be nicer or less self-centered was like expecting a blind man to see,"
she said. "It also explained some of the choices he'd made about his
daughter Lisa at that time. I thinkthe issue is empathy—the capacity
for empathy is lacking."
Redse later married, had two children, and then divorced. Every
now and thenJobs would openly pine for her, even after he was hap

pily married. And when he began his batde with cancer, she got in
touch again to give support. She became very emotional whenever she
recalled their relationship. "Though our values clashed and made it
impossible for us to have the relationship we once hoped for," she told
me,"the care and love I feltfor him decades ago has continued." Simi

larly, Jobs suddenly started to cry one afternoon as he sat in his living
room reminiscing about her. "She was oneofthe purest people I'veever
known," he said, tears rolling down his cheeks. "Therewas something
spiritual about herand spiritual about theconnection we had." He said
he always regretted that they could not make it work, andhe knew that
shehad such regrets as well. But it was not meant to be. On that they
both agreed.

CHAPTER

TWENTY-ONE

FAMILY MAN
At Home with the Jobs Clan

With Laurene Powell 1991

Laurene Powell

By this point, based on his dating history, a matchmaker could have
put together a composite sketch of the woman who would be right

for Jobs. Smart, yet unpretentious. Tough enough to stand up to him,
yet Zen-like enough to rise above turmoil. Well-educated and in
dependent, yet ready to make accommodations for him and a fam

ily. Down-to-earth, butwith a touch ofthe ethereal. Savvy enough to
know how to manage him, but secure enough to not always need to.
267

268

Walter Isaacson

And it wouldn't hurt to be a beautiful,lanky blonde with an easygoing

sense of humor who liked organic vegetarian food. In October 1989,
after his splitwithTina Redse, just such a woman walked into his life.
More specifically, just such a woman walked into his classroom.
Jobs had agreed to give one of the"View from theTop" lectures at the
Stanford Business School oneThursdayevening. Laurene Powell was
a new graduate student at the business school, and a guy in her class
talked her into going to the lecture. They arrived late and all the seats
were taken, so theysatin the aisle. When an usher told them theyhad
to move, Powell took her friend down to the front row and comman
deered two of the reserved seats there. Jobs was led to the one next to

her when he arrived. "I looked to my right, and there was a beautifid
girl there, so we started chatting while I was waiting to beintroduced,"
Jobs recalled. Theybantered a bit, andLaurene jokedthat shewas sit
ting there because she hadwon a raffle, and the prize was that he got
to take her to dinner. "He was so adorable," she later said.

Afterthe speechJobs hungaround ontheedge ofthe stage chatting
with students. He watched Powell leave, then come back and stand at

theedge ofthecrowd, then leave again. He bolted outafter her, brush
ingpast thedean, who was trying to grab him for a conversation. After
catching up with her in the parking lot, he said, "Excuse me, wasn't
there something about a raffle you won, that I'm supposed to take you
to dinner?" Shelaughed. "How about Saturday?" he asked. Sheagreed
and wrote down her number. Jobs headed to his car to drive up to the

Thomas Fogarty winery in the Santa Cruz mountains above Woodside, where the NeXT education sales group was holding a dinner. But
he suddenly stopped and turned around. "I thought, wow, I'd rather
have dinnerwith her than the education group, so I ran backto her car
and said 'How about dinner tonight? " She said yes. It was a beautifid
fall evening, and theywalked into Palo Alto to a funky vegetarian res
taurant, St.Michael's Alley, andended up staying there for four hours.
"We've been together ever since," he said.
Avie Tevanian was sitting at the winery restaurant waiting with
the rest of the NeXT education group. "Steve was sometimes unreli
able, but when I talked to him I realized that something special had

come up," he said. As soon as Powell got home, after midnight, she

Family Man

269

called herclose friend Kathryn (Kat) Smith, who was at Berkeley, and
left a message on her machine. "You will not believe what just hap
pened to me!" it said. "You will not believe who I met!" Smith called
back the next morning and heard the tale. "We had known about
Steve, and he was a person of interestto us, because we were business
students," she recalled.

Andy Hertzfeld and a few others later speculated that Powell had
been scheming to meetJobs. "Laurene is nice, but she can be calculat
ing, andI think she targeted himfrom the beginning," Hertzfeld said.

"Her college roommate told me thatLaurene had magazine covers of
Steve andvowed shewas going to meet him. If it's true that Steve was
manipulated, there is a fair amount of irony there." But Powell later
insisted that this wasn't the case. She went only because her friend
wanted to go, and she was slighdy confused as to who they were going

to see. "I knew that Steve Jobs was the speaker, but the face I thought
ofwas thatofBill Gates," she recalled. "Ihad them mixed up. This was
1989. He was working at NeXT, and he was not that big of a deal to
me. I wasn't that enthused, but myfriend was, sowewent."

"There were only two women in my life that I was truly in love
with, Tina and Laurene," Jobs later said. "I thought I was in love with
Joan Baez, but I really just liked her a lot. It was justTina and then
Laurene."

Laurene Powell hadbeen born in NewJersey in 1963 andlearned to be
self-sufficient atan early age. Herfather was aMarine Corps pilot who

died a hero in a crash in Santa Ana, California; he had been leading a
crippled plane infor alanding, and when it hithis plane he kept flying
to avoid a residential area rather than ejecting in time to save his life.
Her mother's second marriage turned out to be a horrible situation,
butshe felt she couldn't leave because she had no means to support her
large family. For ten years Laurene and her threebrothers had to suffer
in a tense household, keeping agood demeanor while compartmental
izing problems. She did well. "The lesson I learned was clear, that I

always wanted tobe self-sufficient," she said. "Itook pride in that. My
relationship with money is that it's a tool to be self-sufficient, but it's
not something that is part of who I am."

The Second Coming

303

new operatingsystem. "Amelio paid a lot for NeXT, and let's be frank,

the NeXT OS was never really used." Instead the purchase ended up
bringing inAvie Tevanian, who could help the existing Apple operat
ing system evolve so that it eventually incorporated the kernel of the

NeXT technology. Gates knew that the deal was destined to bring
Jobs back topower. "But that was a twist offate," he said. "What they
ended up buying was aguy who most people would nothave predicted
would be a great CEO, because he didn't have much experience at it,
but he was a brilliant guy with great design taste and great engineer
ing taste. He suppressed his craziness enough toget himselfappointed
interim CEO."

Despite what both Ellison and Gates believed, Jobs had deeply con
flicted feelings about whether he wanted to return to an active role at

Apple, at least while Amelio was there. A few days before the NeXT
purchase was due to be announced, Amelio asked Jobs to rejoin Apple
full-time and take charge of operating system development. Jobs,
however, kept deflecting Amelio's request.
Finally, onthe day that he was scheduled tomake the big announce
ment, Amelio called Jobs in. He needed an answer. "Steve, do you just
want to take your money and leave?" Amelio asked. "It's okay if that's
what you want."Jobs did not answer; he just stared. "Do you want tobe
on thepayroll? An advisor?" Again Jobs stayed silent. Amelio wentout
and grabbed Jobs's lawyer, Larry Sonsini, and asked what he thought
Jobs wanted. "Beats me," Sonsini said. So Amelio went back behind

closed doors with Jobs and gave it one more try. "Steve, what's on your
mind? What are you feeling? Please, I need a decision now."

"I didn't getany sleep last night,"Jobs replied.
"Why? What's the problem?"
"I was thinking about all the things that need to be done and about

the deal we're making, and it's all running together for me. I'm really
tired now and not thinking clearly. I just don't want to be asked any
more questions."

Amelio said that wasn't possible. He needed to say something.
Finally Jobs answered, "Look, ifyou have to tell them something,
just say advisor to the chairman."And that is what Amelio did.

304

Walter Isaacson

The announcement wasmade that evening—December 20,1996—

in front of 250 cheering employees at Apple headquarters. Ame
lio did as Jobs had requested and described his new role as merely
that of a part-time advisor. Instead of appearing from the wings of
the stage, Jobs walked in from the rear ofthe auditorium and ambled
down the aisle. Amelio had told the gathering that Jobs would be too
tired to say anything, but by then he had been energized by the ap
plause. "I'm very excited," Jobs said. "I'm looking forward to get to
reknow some old colleagues." Louise Kehoe of the Financial Times
came up to the stage afterward and asked Jobs, sounding almost ac
cusatory, whether hewas going to end up taking over Apple. "Oh no,
Louise," he said. "There are a lot of other things going on in my life
now. I have a family. I am involved at Pixar. My time is limited, but
I hopeI can share some ideas."
The next dayJobs drove to Pbcar. He hadfallen increasingly in love
with the place, and he wanted to let the crew there know he was still
going to be president and deeply involved. But the Pixar people were
happy to see him go back toApple part-time; alittle less ofJobs's focus
would be a good thing. He was useful when there were big negotia
tions, but he could be dangerous when he had too much time on his
hands. When he arrived at Pixar that day, he went to Lasseter's office
and explained that even justbeing anadvisor at Apple would take up a
lot of his time. He saidhe wanted Lasseter's blessing. "I keep thinking

about all the time away from my family this will cause, and the time
away from the other family at Pixar," Jobs said. "But the only reason
I want to do it is that the world will be a betterplace with Apple in it."
Lasseter smiled gently. "You have my blessing," he said.

CHAPTER

TWENTY-FOUR

THE RESTORATION
The Loser Now Will Be Later to Win

Amelio calling up Wozniak asJobs hangs back, 1997

Hovering Backstage
"It's rare that you see an artist in his thirties or forties able to really
contribute something amazing," Jobs declared as he was about to turn
thirty.

That held trueforJobs in his thirties, during the decade that began
with his ouster from Apple in 1985. But after turning forty in 1995,
he flourished. Toy Story was released that year, and the following year
Apple's purchase of NeXT offered him reentry into the company he
had founded. In returning to Apple, Jobs would show that even peo305

306

Walter Isaacson

pie over forty couldbe great innovators. Having transformed personal
computers in his twenties,he would now help to do the same for music
players, the recording industry's business model, mobile phones, apps,
tablet computers, books, and journalism.
He had told Larry Ellison that his return strategy was to sell
NeXT to Apple, get appointed to the board, and be there ready when
CEO Gil Amelio stumbled. Ellison may havebeen baffledwhen Jobs
insisted that he was not motivated by money, but it was pardy true.
He had neither Ellison's conspicuous consumption needs nor Gates's
philanthropic impulses nor the competitive urge to see how high on
the Forbes list he could get. Instead his ego needs and personal drives
led him to seek fulfillment by creating a legacy that would awe peo
ple. A dual legacy, actually: building innovative products and building
a lasting company. He wanted to be in the pantheon with, indeed a
notch above, people like Edwin Land, Bill Hewlett, and David Pack
ard. And the best way to achieve all this was to return to Apple and
reclaim his kingdom.
And yet when the cupofpower neared hislips, he became strangely
hesitant,reluctant, perhaps coy.
He returned to Apple officially in January 1997as a part-time ad
visor, as he had told Amelio he would. He began to assert himself
in some personnel areas, especially in protecting his people who had
made the transition from NeXT. But in most other ways he was un
usually passive. The decision not to askhim to join the board offended
him, andhe felt demeaned by the suggestion that he run the company's
operating system division. Amelio was thus able to create a situation
in which Jobs was both inside the tent and outside the tent, which was
not a prescription for tranquillity. Jobs later recalled:
Gil didn't want me around. And I thought he was a bozo. I knew that
before I soldhim the company. I thought I was just goingto be trotted
out now and then for eventslike Macworld, mainly for show. That was
fine, because I wasworkingat Pbcar. I rented anoffice in downtownPalo
Alto where I couldwork a few days aweek, and I drove up to Pixar for

one or two days. It was a nice life. I could slow down, sperid time with
my family.

The Restoration

307

Jobs was, infact, trotted out for Macworld right atthe beginning of
January, and this reaffirmed his opinion that Amelio was abozo. Close
to four thousand of the faithful fought for seats in the ballroom of the
San Francisco Marriott to hear Amelio's keynote address. He was in

troduced by the actor Jeff Goldblum. "Iplay an expert in chaos theory
in The Lost World:Jurassic Park," he said. "I figure that will qualify me

to speak at an Apple event." He then turned it over to Amelio, who
came onstage wearing a flashy sports jacket and a banded-collar shirt
buttoned tight attheneck, "looking Uke aVegas comic," the Wall Street
Journal reporter Jim Carlton noted, or in the words of the technol
ogy writer Michael Malone, "looking exacdy like your newly divorced
uncle on his first date."

The bigger problem was thatAmelio had gone onvacation, gotten
into anasty tussle with his speechwriters, and refused torehearse. When
Jobs arrived backstage, he was upset by the chaos, and he seethed as
Amelio stood onthepodium bumbling through a disjointed and end

less presentation. Amelio was unfamiliar with the talking points that
popped up on his teleprompter and soon was trying to wing his pre
sentation. Repeatedly he lost his train ofthought. After more than an
hour, theaudience was aghast. There were a few welcome breaks, such
as when he brought out the singer Peter Gabriel to demonstrate a new
music program. He also pointed out Muhammad Ali in the first row;
the champ was supposed to come onstage to promote a website about
Parkinson's disease, but Amelio never invited him up or explained why
he was there.

Amelio rambled for more than two hours before he finally called

onstage the person everyone was waiting to cheer. "Jobs, exuding con
fidence, style, and sheer magnetism, was the antithesis ofthefumbling
Amelio as he strode onstage," Carlton wrote. "The return of Elvis
would not have provoked a bigger sensation." The crowd jumped to
its feet and gave him a raucous ovation for more than a minute. The
wilderness decade was over. Finally Jobs waved for silence and cut to
the heart of the challenge. "We've got to getthe spark back," he said.
"The Mac didn't progress much in tenyears. So Windows caught up.
Sowe have to come up with an OS that's even better."

Jobs's pep talk could have been a redeeming finale to Amelio's

308

Walter Isaacson

frightening performance. Unfortunately Amelio came back onstage
and resumed his ramblings for another hour. Finally, more than three

hours after the show began, Amelio brought itto aclose by callingJobs
back onstage and then, in a surprise, bringing up Steve Wozniak as
well. Again there was pandemonium. ButJobs was clearly annoyed. He
avoided engaging in atriumphant trio scene, arms in the air. Instead he

slowly edged offstage. "He ruthlessly ruined the closing moment I had
planned," Amelio later complained. "His own feelings were more im
portant than good press for Apple." Itwas only seven days into the new
year for Apple, and already it was clear thatthe center would not hold.

Jobs immediately put people he trusted into the top ranks at Apple.
"I wanted to make sure the really good people who came in from

NeXT didn't get knifed in the back by the less competent people who
were then in senior jobs at Apple," he recalled. Ellen Hancock, who

had favored choosing Sun's Solaris over NeXT, was on the top ofhis
bozo list, especially when she continued to want to use the kernel of

Solaris in the new Apple operating system. In response to areporter's
question about the role Jobs would play in making that decision, she
answered curtly, "None." She was wrong. Jobs's first move was to make
surethat two of his friends from NeXT took over her duties.

To head software engineering, he tapped his buddy Avie Tevanian.
To run the hardware side, he called on Jon Rubinstein, who had done
the same at NeXT backwhen it had a hardware division. Rubinstein

was vacationing on the Isle ofSkye whenJobs called him. "Apple needs
some help," he said. "Do you want to come aboard?" Rubinstein did.
He got back in time to attend Macworld and see Amelio bomb on

stage. Things were worse than he expected. He and Tevanian would
exchange glances at meetings as if they had stumbled into an insane
asylum, with people making deluded assertions while Amelio sat atthe
end of the table in aseeming stupor.

Jobs did not come into the office regularly, but he was on the phone
toAmelio often. Once he had succeeded inmaking sure thatTevanian,
Rubinstein, and others he trusted were given top positions, heturned
his focus onto the sprawling product line. One ofhis pet peeves was
Newton, the handheld personal digital assistant that boasted hand-

The Restoration

309

writing recognition capability. It was not quite as bad as the jokes and
Doonesbury comic strip made it seem, butJobs hated it. He disdained
the idea of having a stylus or pen for writing on a screen. "God gave
us ten styluses," he would say, waving his fingers. "Let's not invent
another." In addition, he viewed Newton as John Sculley's one major
innovation, his pet project. That alone doomed it in Jobs's eyes.
"You ought to killNewton," he told Amelio one dayby phone.
It was a suggestion out ofthe blue, andAmelio pushedback. "What
do you mean, kill it?" he said. "Steve, do you have any idea how expen
sive that would be?"

"Shut it down,write it off, get rid of it," saidJobs."It doesn'tmatter
what it costs. People willcheeryouif yougot rid of it."
"I've looked into Newton and it's going to be a moneymaker,"
Amelio declared. "I don't support getting rid of it." By May, however,
he announced plans to spin off the Newton division, the beginning of
its yearlong stutter-step march to the grave.
Tevanian and Rubinstein would come byJobs's house to keep him
informed, and soon much of SiliconValley knew that Jobs was quietly
wresting power from Amelio. It was not so much a Machiavellian
powerplayas it wasJobs beingJobs.Wanting controlwas ingrainedin
his nature. Louise Kehoe, the Financial Times reporter who had fore
seen this when she questioned Jobs and Amelio at the December an
nouncement, was the first with the story. "Mr. Jobs has become the
power behind the throne," she reported at the end of February. "He
is said to be directing decisions on which parts of Apple's operations
shouldbe cut.Mr.Jobs has urgeda numberof formerApple colleagues
to return to the company, hinting strongly that he plans to take charge,
they said. According to one of Mr. Jobs' confidantes, he has decided
that Mr. Amelio and his appointees are unlikely to succeed in reviving
Apple, and he is intent upon replacing them to ensure the survival of
'his company'"
That month Amelio had to face the annual stockholders meeting
and explain why the results for the final quarter of 1996 showed a
30% plummet in sales from the year before. Shareholders lined up at
the microphones to vent their anger. AmeHo was clueless about how
poorly he handled the meeting."The presentation was regarded as one

310

Walter Isaacson

of the best I had ever given," he later wrote. But Ed Woolard, the

former CEO of DuPont who was now the chair of the Apple board
(Markkula had been demoted tovice chair), was appalled. "This is adi
saster," his wife whispered to him in the midstof the session. Woolard

agreed. "Gil came dressed real cool, but he looked and sounded silly,"
he recalled. "He couldn't answer the questions, didn't know what he
was talking about, and didn't inspire anyconfidence."
Woolard picked up the phone and called Jobs, whom he'd never
met. The pretext was to invite him to Delaware to speak to DuPont ex
ecutives. Jobs declined, but as Woolard recalled, "the request was a ruse
in order to talk to him about Gil." He steered the phone call in that
direction and asked Jobs point-blank what his impression of Amelio
was. Woolard remembers Jobs being somewhat circumspect, saying
that Amelio was not in the right job. Jobs recalled being more blunt:
I thought to myself, I either tellhim the truth, that Gil is a bozo,or I lie
byomission. He s on the board ofApple, I have a dutyto tellhimwhatI
think; on the other hand, if I tell him, he will tell Gil, in which case Gil

will never listen to me again, and he'll fuck the people I brought into
Apple. Allofthistookplace in my head in less thanthirtyseconds. I fi
nally decided that I owed thisguy the truth. I cared deeply about Apple.
So I just let him have it. I saidthis guyis the worstCEO I've everseen,
I thinkif you needed a license to be a CEO he wouldn't get one. When
I hungup the phone, I thought, I probably justdida really stupid thing.

That spring Larry Ellison saw Amelio at a party and introduced him
to the technology journalist Gina Smith, who asked how Apple was
doing. "You know, Gina,Apple is like a ship," Amelio answered. "That
shipisloadedwith treasure, but there's a holein the ship. And myjob is
to get everyone to rowin the same direction." Smithlooked perplexed
and asked, "Yeah,but what about the hole?"From then on, Ellison and

Jobs joked about the parable of the ship. "When Larry relayed this
story to me,we werein this sushi place, and I literally fell off my chair
laughing,"Jobs recalled. "He wasjust sucha buffoon, and he took him
selfso seriously. He insisted that everyone call him Dr. Amelio. That's
always a warning sign."

The Restoration

311

Brent Schlender, Fortunes well-sourced technology reporter, knew
Jobs and was famiHar with his thinking, and in March he came out

with a story detailing the mess. "Apple Computer, Silicon Valley's
paragon of dysfunctional management and fumbled techno-dreams,
is backin crisis mode, scrambling lugubriously in slowmotion to deal
with imploding sales, a floundering technology strategy, and a hemor
rhaging brand name," he wrote. "To the Machiavellian eye, it looks as
ifJobs, despite the lure of Hollywood—lately he has been overseeing
Pixar, maker of Toy Story and other computer-animated films—might
be schemingto take over Apple."
Once again Ellison publicly floated the idea of doing a hos
tile takeover and installing his "best friend" Jobs as CEO. "Steve's
the only one who can save Apple," he told reporters. "I'm ready to
help him the minute he says the word." Like the third time the boy
cried wolf, Ellison's latest takeover musings didn't get much notice,
so later in the month he told Dan Gillmore of the San Jose Mercury
News that he was forming an investor group to raise $1 billion to buy
a majority stake in Apple. (The company's market value was about
$2.3 billion.) The daythe story came out, Apple stock shot up 11%in
heavytrading. To add to the frivolity, Ellison set up an email address,
savapple@us.oracle.com, asking the general public to vote on whether
he should go ahead with it.
Jobs was somewhat amused by Ellison's self-appointed role. "Larry
brings this up now and then," he told a reporter. "I try to explain my
role atApple is to be anadvisor." Amelio,however, was livid. He called
Ellison to dress him down, but Ellison wouldn't take the call. So Ame

lio called Jobs, whose response was equivocal but also partlygenuine. "I
really don't understand what is going on,"he told Amelio. "I think all
this is crazy." Then he added a reassurance that was not at allgenuine:
"You and I have a good relationship." Jobs could have ended the specu
lation by releasing a statement rejecting Ellison's idea, but much to
Amelio's annoyance, he didn't. He remained aloof, which served both
his interests and his nature.

By then the press had turned against Amelio. Business Week ran
a cover asking "Is Apple Mincemeat?"; Red Herring ran an editorial
headlined "Gil Amelio, Please Resign"; and Wired ran a cover that

312

Walter Isaacson

showed the Apple logo crucified as a sacred heart with a crown of
thorns and the headline "Pray." Mike Barnicle of the Boston Globe, rail
ing against years of Apple mismanagement, wrote, "How can these
nitwits still draw a paycheck when they took the only computer that

didn't frighten people and turned it into the technological equivalent
of the 1997Red Sox bullpen?"
WhenJobs andAmelio hadsigned thecontract in February,Jobs began
hopping around exuberantly and declared, "You and I need to go out
and have a great bottle of wine to celebrate!" Amelio offered to bring
wine from his cellar and suggested that theyinvite their wives. It took
untilJunebefore theysettled on a date, anddespite the rising tensions
they were able to have a good time.The food and wine were as mis
matched as the diners; Amelio brought a bottle of 1964 ChevalBlanc

and a Montrachet that each cost about $300; Jobs chose a vegetarian
restaurant in Redwood City where the food bill totaled $72. Amelio's
wife remarked afterward, "He's such a charmer, and his wife is too."

Jobs could seduce and charm people at will, and he liked to do so.
People such as Amelio and Sculley allowed themselves to believe that
because Jobs was charming them, it meant that he liked and respected
them. It was an impression that he sometimes fostered by dishing out
insincere flattery to those hungry for it. ButJobs could be charming
to people he hatedjust as easily as he could be insulting to people he
liked. Amelio didn't see this because, like Sculley, he was so eager for
Jobs's affection. Indeed the words he used to describe his yearning for
a good relationship with Jobs are almost the same as those used by
Sculley. "When I was wrestling with a problem, I would walkthrough
the issue with him," Amelio recalled. "Nine times out often we would

agree." Somehow he willed himselfto believe thatJobs really respected
him: "I was in awe over the way Steve's mind approached problems,
and had the feeling wewere building a mutually trustingrelationship."
Amelio's disillusionment came a few days after their dinner. Dur
ing their negotiations, he had insisted that Jobs hold the Apple stock
he got for at least six months, and preferably longer. That six months
ended in June. When a block of 1.5 million shares was sold, Amelio

called Jobs."I'm tellingpeople that the shares soldwere not yours," he

The Restoration

313

said. "Remember, you and I had an understanding that you wouldn't
sell anywithout advising us first."

"That's right,"Jobs replied. Amelio took thatresponse to mean that
Jobs had not sold his shares, and he issued a statement saying so. But
when the next SEC filing came out, it revealed that Jobs had indeed
sold the shares. "Dammit, Steve, I asked you point-blank about these

shares andyou denied it was you."Jobs told Amelio that he hadsold in
a "fit of depression" about where Apple was going and he didn't want
to admit it because he was "a little embarrassed." When I asked him

about it years later, he simply said, "I didn't feel I needed to tell Gil."
Why didJobs mislead Amelio about selling the shares? One rea
son is simple: Jobs sometimes avoided the truth. Helmut Sonnenfeldt
once said of Henry Kissinger, "He lies not because it's in his interest,
he lies because it's in his nature." It was in Jobs's nature to mislead or
be secretive when he felt it was warranted. But he also indulged in

being brutally honest at times, telling the truths that most of us sugarcoat or suppress. Both the dissembling and the truth-telling were
simply different aspects ofhis Nietzschean attitude that ordinary rules
didn't applyto him.

Exit, Pursued by a Bear
Jobs had refused to quash Larry EUison's takeover talk, and he had
secretly sold his shares and been misleading about it. So Amelio finally
became convinced that Jobs was gunning for him. "I finally absorbed
the fact that I had been too willing and too eager to believe he was on
my team," Amelio recalled. "Steve's plans to manipulate my termina
tion were chargingforward."
Jobs was indeed bad-mouthing Amelio at every opportunity. He
couldn't helphimself. But therewas a more importantfactor in turning

the board against Amelio. Fred Anderson, the chieffinancial officer,
saw it as his fiduciary duty to keep Ed Woolard and the board in
formed ofApple's dire situation. "Fred was theguy telling methat cash
was draining, people were leaving, and more key players were think
ing of it," said Woolard. "He made it clear the ship was going to hit

314

Walter Isaacson

the sand soon, and even he was thinking of leaving." That added to
the worries Woolard already had from watching Amelio bumble the
shareholders meeting.
At an executive session ofthe board inJune, withAmelio out of the
room, Woolard described to current directors how he calculated their

odds. "Ifwe stay with Gil as CEO, I think there's only a 10% chance
we will avoid bankruptcy," he said. "If we fire him and convince Steve

to come take over, we have a 60% chance of surviving. If we fire Gil,
don't get Steve back, and have to search for a newCEO, then we have

a 40% chance ofsurviving." The board gave him authority to ask Jobs
to return.

Woolard and his wife flew toLondon, where they were planning to
Ayatch the Wimbledon tennis matches. He saw some ofthe tennis dur

ing the day, but spent his evenings in his suite at the Inn on the Park

calling people back inAmerica, where itwas daytime. By the end ofhis
stay, his telephone billwas $2,000.

First, he called Jobs. The board was going to fire Amelio, he said,

and it wanted Jobs to come back as CEO. Jobs had been aggressive
in deriding Amelio and pushing his own ideas about where to take

Apple. But suddenly, when offered the cup, he became coy. "I will
help," he replied.
"As CEO?" Woolard asked.

Jobs said no. Woolard pushed hardfor him to become at least the
acting CEO. Again Jobs demurred. "Iwill be an advisor," he said. "Un

paid." Healso agreed to become aboard member—that was something
he had yearned for—butdeclined to be the board chairman. "That's all

I can give now," he said. After rumors began circulating, he emailed a
memo to Pixar employees assuring them thathewas not abandoning
them. "Igot acall from Apple's board ofdirectors three weeks ago ask
ing me to return to Apple as their CEO," he wrote. "I declined. They
then asked me to become chairman, and I again declined. So don't
worry—the crazy rumors are justthat. I have no plans to leave Pbcar.
You're stuck with me."

Whydid Jobs notseize the reins? Whywas hereluctant tograb the
job that for two decades he had seemed to desire? When I asked him,
he said:

The Restoration

315

Wed just taken Pixar public, andI was happy being CEO there. I never
knew of anyone who served as CEO of two public companies, even
temporarily, and I wasn't even sure it was legal. I didn't know what I
wanted to do. I wasenjoying spending more time with my family. I was
torn. I knew Apple was a mess, so I wondered: Do I want to give up
this nice lifestyle that I have? What are allthe Pixar shareholders going
to think? I talked to people I respected. I finally called Andy Grove at
about eightone Saturday morning—too early. I gave him the pros and
the cons, and in the middle he stopped me and said, "Steve, I don'tgive
a shit aboutApple." I was stunned. It was then I realized that I do give a
shitabout Apple—I started it and it isa good thingto have in theworld.
That waswhen I decided to go backon a temporary basis to help them
hire a CEO.

The claim that he was enjoying spending more time with his family
was not convincing. He was never destined towin a Father oftheYear
trophy, even when he had spare time on his hands. He was getting
better at paying heed to his children, especially Reed, but his primary
focus was on his work. He was frequently alooffrom his two younger

daughters, estranged again from Lisa, and often prickly as a husband.
So what was the real reason for his hesitancy in taking over at

Apple? For all ofhis willfulness and insatiable desire to control things,
Jobs was indecisive and reticent when he felt unsure about something.
He craved perfection, and he was not always good at figuring outhow
to setde for something less. He did not like to wresde with complex
ity or make accommodations. This was true in products, design, and
furnishings for the house. It was also true when it came to personal
commitments. If he knew for sure a course of action was right, he was

unstoppable. But if he had doubts, he sometimes withdrew, preferring
not to think about things that did not perfectly suithim. As happened
when Amelio had asked him what role he wanted to play, Jobs would

go silent and ignore situations that made him uncomfortable.
This attitude arose partly out of his tendency to see the world in
binary terms. A person was either ahero orabozo, aproduct was either
amazing or shit. But he could be stymied by things that were more
complex, shaded, or nuanced: getting married, buying the right sofa,

316

Walter Isaacson

committing to run a company. In addition, he didn't want to be set

up for failure. "I think Steve wanted to assess whether Apple could be
saved," Fred Anderson said.

Woolard and the board decided to go ahead and fire Amelio, even
though Jobs was not yet forthcoming about how active arole he would
play as an advisor. Amelio was about to go on a picnic with his wife,
children, and grandchildren when the call came from Woolard in
London. "We need you to step down," Woolard said simply. Amelio
replied that it was not a good time to discuss this, but Woolard felt he

had to persist. "We are going to announce that we're replacing you."
Amelio resisted. "Remember, Ed, I told the board it was going to
take three years to get this company back on its feet again," he said.
"I'm not even halfway through."
"The board is at the place where we don't want to discuss it fur
ther," Woolard replied. Amelio asked who knew about the decision,
and Woolard told himthetruth: the rest oftheboard plus Jobs. "Steve
was one of the people we talked to about this,"Woolard said. "His
viewisthatyou're areally nice guy, but you don't knowmuchabout the
computerindustry."

"Why in the world would you involve Steve in adecision likethis?"
Amelio replied, getting angry. "Steve isnoteven amember of theboard
of directors, so what the hell is he doing in any of this conversation?"

But Woolard didn't back down, and Amelio hung up to carry on with
the family picnic before telling his wife.
At times Jobs displayed astrange mixture of prickliness and needi-

ness. He usually didn't care one iota what people thought of him; he
could cut people off and never care to speak to them again. Yet some
times he also felt a compulsion to explain himself. So that evening
Amelio received, to his surprise, a phone call from Jobs. "Gee, Gil, I
just wanted you to know, I talked to Ed today about this thing and
I really feel bad about it," he said. "Iwant you to know thatI had abso
lutely nothing to do with this turn ofevents, it wasa decision the board
made, but they had asked me for advice and counsel." He told Amelio

he respected him for having "the highest integrity of anyone I've ever
met," and went on to give some unsolicited advice. "Take six months

The Restoration

317

off,"Jobs told him. "When I got thrown out of Apple, I immediately
went back to work, and I regretted it." He offered to be a sounding
board if AmeHo ever wanted more advice.

Ameliowas stunned but managed to mumble a fewwords ofthanks.
He turned to his wife andrecounted whatJobs said. "In ways,I stilllike
the man, but I don't believe him," he told her.

"I was totally taken in by Steve," she said, "and I really feel Uke an
idiot."

"Join the crowd," her husbandreplied.
Steve Wozniak, who was himself now an informal advisor to the

company, was thrilled that Jobs was coming back. (He forgave easily.)
"It was just what we needed," he said, "because whatever you think of
Steve, he knows how to get the magic back." Nor did Jobs's triumph
over Amelio surprise him. As he told Wired shortly after it happened,
"Gil Amelio meets SteveJobs, game over."

That Monday Apple's top employees were summoned to the au
ditorium. Amelio came in looking calm and relaxed. "Well, I'm sad

to report that it's time for me to move on," he said. Fred Anderson,
who had agreed to be interim CEO, spoke next, and he made it clear
thathewould be taking his cues from Jobs. Then, exacdy twelve years
since he had lost power in aJuly 4 weekend struggle, Jobs walked back
onstage at Apple.

It immediately became clear that, whether or not he wanted to
admit it publicly (or even to himself), Jobs was going to take control
and not be a mere advisor. As soon as he came onstage that day—

wearing shorts, sneakers, and a black turdeneck—he got to work reinvigorating his beloved institution. "Okay, tell me what's wrong with
this place," he said. There were some murmurings, butJobs cut them
off. "It's the products!" he answered. "So what's wrong with the prod
ucts?" Again there were a few attempts at an answer, untilJobs broke
in to hand down the correct answer. "The products suckl" he shouted.
"There's no sex in them anymore!"

Woolard was able to coax Jobs to agree that his role as an advisor
would be a very active one. Jobs approved a statement saying that he

had "agreed to step up my involvement with Apple for up to 90 days,

318

Walter Isaacson

helpingthem until they hire a new CEO."The clever formulation that

Woolard used in his statement was that Jobs was coming back "as an
advisor leadingthe team."
Jobs took a small office next to the boardroom on the executive

floor, conspicuously eschewing Amelio's big corner office. He got in
volved in all aspects ofthebusiness: product design, where to cut, sup
plier negotiations, and advertising agency review. He believed that he
had to stop the hemorrhaging of top Apple employees, and to do so
he wanted to reprice their stock options. Apple stock had dropped
so low that the options had become worthless. Jobs wanted to lower
the exercise price, so they would be valuable again. At the time, that

was legally permissible, butit was notconsidered good corporate prac
tice. On his first Thursday back at Apple, Jobs called for a telephonic
board meeting and outlined the problem. The directors balked. They
asked for time to do a legal and financial study of what the change
would mean. "It has to be done fast," Jobs told them. "We're losing
good people."

Even his supporter Ed Woolard, who headed the compensation
committee, objected. "At DuPont we never didsuch a thing," he said.

"You brought me here to fix this thing, and people are the key,"
Jobs argued. When the board proposed a study that could take two
months,Jobs exploded: "Are you nuts?!?" Hepaused for along moment
of silence, then continued. "Guys, ifyou don't want to do this, I'm not
coming back onMonday. Because I've gotthousands ofkey decisions
to make thatare far more difficult than this, and ifyou can't throw your
support behind this kind of decision, I will fail. Soif you can't do this,
I'moutofhere, and you can blame it onme, you can say, 'Steve wasn't
up for the job.'"

The next day, after consulting withthe board, Woolard called Jobs
back. "We're going to approve this," he said. "But some of the board
members don't like it.We feel like you've put a gunto our head." The
options for the top team (Jobs had none) were reset at $13.25, which
was the price of the stock the day Amelio was ousted.
Instead of declaring victory and thanking the board, Jobs contin

ued to seethe at having to answer to a board he didn't respect. "Stop
the train, this isn't going to work," he told Woolard. "This company is

The Restoration

319

in shambles, and I don't have time to wet-nurse the board. So I need

all of you to resign. Or else I'm going to resign and not come backon
Monday." The one person who could stay, he said, was Woolard.
Most members of the board were aghast. Jobs was still refusing to
commit himselfto coming backfull-time or beinganything morethan
an advisor, yet he felt he had the power to force them to leave. The
hard truth, however, was that he did have that power over them.They
could not afford for him to storm off in a fury, nor was the prospect

of remaining an Apple board member very enticing by then."After all
they'd been through, most were glad to be let off," Woolard recalled.
Onceagain the board acquiesced. It made only onerequest: Would
he permit one other director to stay, in addition to Woolard? It would
help the optics. Jobs assented. "They were an awful board, a terrible
board," he later said. "I agreed they could keep Ed Woolard and a guy
named Gareth Chang, who turnedout to be a zero. He wasn't terrible,
just a zero. Woolard, on the other hand, was one of the best board
members I've ever seen. He was a prince, one of the most supportive
and wise people I've ever met."
Among those being asked to resign was Mike Markkula, who in
1976, as a young venture capitalist, had visited the Jobs garage, fallen
in love with the nascent computer on the workbench, guaranteed a
$250,000 line of credit, and become the third partner and one-third
owner of the newcompany. Over the subsequent two decades, he was
the one constanton the board, ushering in and out a variety of CEOs.
He had supported Jobs at times but also clashed with him, most nota
blywhen he sided with Sculley in the showdowns of 1985. With Jobs
returning, he knewthat it was time for him to leave.
Jobscould be cuttingandcold, especially toward people whocrossed
him, but he could also be sentimental about those who had been with
him from the early days. Wozniak fell into that favored category, of

course, even though they had drifted apart; so did Andy Hertzfeld
and a few others from the Macintosh team. In the end, Mike Mark

kuladid aswell. "I felt deeply betrayed by him, but he waslike a father
and I always cared about him,"Jobs later recalled. So when the time
came to ask him to resign from the Apple board, Jobs drove to Markkula's chateau-like mansion in the Woodside hills to do it personally.

320

Walter Isaacson

As usual, he asked to take a walk, and they strolled the grounds to a
redwood grove with a picnic table. "He told me he wanted a new board
because he wanted to start fresh,"Markkula said. "He was worried that

I might take it poorly, and he was relieved when I didn't."

They spent the rest ofthe time talking about where Apple should
focus in thefuture. Jobs's ambition was to build a company thatwould
endure, and he asked Markkula what the formula for that would be.

Markkula replied that lasting companies know howto reinvent them
selves. Hewlett-Packard had done that repeatedly; it started as an
instrument company, then became a calculator company, then a com
putercompany. "Apple has been sidelined byMicrosoft in the PC busi
ness," Markkula said. "You've gotto reinvent the company to do some

other thing, like other consumer products or devices. You've got to be
like a butterfly and have a metamorphosis." Jobs didn't say much, but
he agreed.

The old board met in late July to ratify the transition. Woolard,
who was as genteel as Jobs was prickly, was mildly taken aback when
Jobs appeared dressed in jeans and sneakers, and he worried thatJobs
might start berating the veteran board members for screwing up. But
Jobs merely offered a pleasant "Hi, everyone." Theygot down to the
business of voting to accept the resignations, elect Jobs to the board,
and empower Woolard andJobs to find new board members.

Jobs's first recruit was, not surprisingly, Larry Ellison. He said he
would be pleased tojoin, but he hated attending meetings. Jobs said it
would be fine if he came to only half of them. (After a while Ellison
was coming to only a third of the meetings. Jobs tooka picture of him
thathad appeared onthe cover ofBusiness Week and had it blown upto
life size and pasted on a cardboard cutout to put in his chair.)
Jobs also brought in Bill Campbell, who had run marketing at
Apple in the early 1980s and been caught in themiddle ofthe SculleyJobs clash. Campbell had ended up sticking with Sculley, but he had
grown to dislike him so much that Jobs forgave him. Now he was the
CEO of Intuit and a walking buddy ofJobs. "We were sitting out in
the back of his house," recalled Campbell, who lived only five blocks
from Jobs in Palo Alto, "and he said he was going back to Apple and
wanted me on the board. I said, 'Holy shit, of course I will do that.'"

The Restoration

321

Campbellhad been a football coach at Columbia, and his great talent,
Jobs said, was to "getA performances out of B players." At Apple,Jobs
told him, he would get to workwith A players.
Woolard helpedbring in JerryYork, who had been the chieffinan
cial officer at Chrysler and then IBM. Others were considered and
then rejected by Jobs, including Meg Whitman, who was then the
manager of Hasbro's Playskool division and had been a strategic plan
ner at Disney. (In 1998 she became CEO of eBay, and she later ran
unsuccessfully for governor of California.) Over the years Jobs would

bring in some strong leaders to serve on theApple board, including Al
Gore, Eric Schmidt of Google, Art Levinson of Genentech, Mickey
Drexler of the Gap and J. Crew, and Andrea Jung of Avon. But he
always made sure they were loyal, sometimes loyal to a fault. Despite
their stature, they seemed at times awed or intimidated byJobs, and
theywere eager to keep him happy.
At one point he invited Arthur Levitt, the former SEC chairman,
to become a board member. Levitt, whoboughthis first Macintosh in
1984 and was proudly "addicted" toApple computers, was thrilled. He
was excited to visit Cupertino, where he discussed the role with Jobs.
But then Jobs read a speech Levitt had given about corporate gover
nance, which argued thatboards should play a strong and independent

role, and he telephoned to withdraw the invitation. "Arthur, I don't
think you'd be happy on our board, and I think it best ifwe not invite
you," Levitt said Jobs told him. "Frankly, I think some of the issues
you raised, while appropriate for some companies, really don't apply to
Apple's culture." Levitt later wrote, "Iwas floored
It's plain to me
that Apple's board is not designed to act independendy ofthe CEO."

Macworld Boston, August 1997
The staffmemo announcing the repricing ofApple's stockoptions was

signed "Steve and the executive team," and it soon became public that
he was running all of the company's product review meetings. These
and other indications that Jobs was now deeply engaged at Apple

helped push the stock up from about $13 to $20 during July. It also

322

Walter Isaacson

created a frisson of excitement as the Apple faithful gathered for the
August 1997 Macworld in Boston. More than five thousand showed
up hours in advance to cram into the Casde convention hall ofthe Park

Plaza hotel forJobs's keynote speech. Theycame to see theirreturning
hero—and to find outwhether hewas really ready to lead them again.
Huge cheers erupted whena picture ofJobsfrom 1984was flashed
on the overhead screen. "Steve! Steve! Steve!" the crowd started to

chant, even as he was still being introduced. When he finally strode
onstage—wearing a black vest, collarless white shirt, jeans, and an
impish smile—the screams and flashbulbs rivaled those for any rock
star. At first hepunctured theexcitement byreminding them ofwhere
he officially worked. "I'mSteve Jobs, the chairman and CEO of Pixar,"
he introduced himself, flashing a slide onscreen with that tide. Then

he explained his role atApple. "I, like alot ofother people, are pulling
together to help Apple gethealthy again."

But as Jobs paced back and forth across the stage, changing the
overhead slides with a clicker in his hand, it was clearthat he was now

in charge at Apple—and was likely to remain so. He delivered a care

fully crafted presentation, using no notes, on why Apple's sales had
fallen by 30% over the previous two years. "There are a lot of great
people atApple, but they're doing the wrong things because the plan
has been wrong," hesaid. "I've found people who can't wait to fall into
line behind a good strategy, butthere justhasn't been one." The crowd
again erupted in yelps, whisdes, and cheers.

As he spoke, his passion poured forth with increasing intensity, and
he began saying "we" and "I"—rather than "they"—when referring to
what Apple would be doing. "Ithink you still have to think differendy
to buy an Apple computer," he said. "The people who buy them do
think different. They are the creative spirits in this world, and they're
out to change the world. We make tools for those kinds of people."
When hestressed the word "we" in thatsentence, hecupped his hands
and tapped his fingers on his chest. And then, in his final peroration,
he continued tostress the word "we" as he talked about Apple's future.
"We too are going to think differendy and serve the people who have
been buying our products from the beginning; Because a lotofpeople
think they're crazy, but in that craziness we see genius." During the

The Restoration

323

prolonged standing ovation, people looked at each other in awe, and a
fewwipedtears from their eyes. Jobshad madeit veryclearthat he and
the "we" of Apple were one.

The Microsoft Pact
The climax ofJobs's August 1997 Macworld appearance was a bomb
shell announcement, one that made the cover ofboth Timeand News

week. Near the end of his speech, he paused for a sip of water and

began to talk in more subdued tones. "Apple lives in an ecosystem,"
he said. "It needs help from other partners. Relationships that are de
structive don't help anybody in this industry." For dramatic effect, he
paused again, and then explained: "I'd like to announce one ofour first
new partnerships today, a very meaningful one, and that is one with
Microsoft." The Microsoft andApple logos appeared together on the
screen as people gasped.

Apple and Microsoft had been atwar for adecade over avariety of
copyright and patent issues, most notably whether Microsoft had sto
lenthelook and feel ofApple's graphical user interface. Justas Jobs was

being eased out ofApple in1985, John Sculley had struck a surrender
deal: Microsoft could license the Apple GUI for Windows 1.0, andin
return it wouldmakeExcel exclusive to the Mac for up to two years. In
1988, after Microsoft came out withWindows 2.0,Apple sued. Scul

ley contended that the 1985 deal did not apply to Windows 2.0 and
that further refinements to Windows (such as copying BillAtkinsons

trick of "clipping" overlapping windows) had made the infringement
more blatant. By 1997 Apple had lost the case and various appeals,
but remnants of the litigation and threats of new suits lingered. In
addition, President Clinton sJustice Department was preparing a mas

sive antitrust case against Microsoft. Jobs invited the lead prosecutor,
Joel Klein, to Palo Alto. Don't worry about extracting a huge remedy
against Microsoft, Jobs told him over coffee. Instead simply keep them

tied up in litigation. That would allow Apple the opportunity, Jobs
explained, to "make an end run" around Microsoft and start offering
competingproducts.

324

Walter Isaacson

UnderAmelio,the showdown hadbecome explosive. Microsoft re
fused to commit to developing Word and Excel for future Macintosh
operating systems, which could have destroyed Apple. In defense of
Bill Gates, he was not simplybeingvindictive. It was understandable
that he was reluctant to commit to developing for a future Macintosh
operating system when no one, including the ever-changing leader
ship at Apple, seemed to knowwhatthat new operating system would
be. Right after Apple bought NeXT, Amelio and Jobs flew together
to visit Microsoft, but Gates had trouble figuring out which of them

was in charge. A few days later he called Jobs privately. "Hey, what the
fuck, am I supposed to put my applications on the NeXT OS?" Gates
asked. Jobs responded by"making smart-ass remarks about Gil,"Gates
recalled, and suggesting that the situation would soonbe clarified.

When the leadership issue was pardy resolved by Amelio's ouster,
one ofJobs's first phone calls was to Gates. Jobs recalled:
I called up Bill 2nd said, Tm going to turn this thing around." Bill al
ways had asoft spot for Apple.We got himinto theapplication software
business. The firs£ Microsoft apps were Excel and Word for theMac. So
I called him antf said, "Ineed help." Microsoft was walking over Apple's
patents. I said, "If we kept up our lawsuits, a few years from nowwe
could win a billion-dollar patent suit. You know it, and I know it. But

Apple's not going to survive that long if we're atwar. I know that. So
let's figure outhowto setde this right away. All I need is acommitment

that Microsoft will keep developing for the Mac and an investment by
Microsoft in Apple soit hasa stake in oursuccess."

When I recounted to him what Jobs said, Gates agreed it was accu
rate. "We had a group of people who liked working on the Mac stuff,
and we liked the Mac," Gates recalled. He had been negotiating with
Amelio for six months, and the proposals kept getting longer and more
complicated. "So Steve comes in and says, 'Hey, that deal is too com
plicated. What I want is a simple deal. I want the commitmentand I
wantan investment.' And so we put thattogether in just four weeks."
Gates and his chief financial officer, Greg Maffei, made the trip
to Palo Alto to work out the framework for a deal, and then Maffei

The Restoration

325

returned alone the following Sunday to work on the details. When he
arrived at Jobs's home, Jobs grabbed two bottles of water out of the
refrigerator and took Maffei for a walk around the Palo Alto neigh
borhood. Both men wore shorts, andJobs walkedbarefoot. As they sat

in front of a Baptist church, Jobs cut to the core issues. "These are the
things we care about," he said. "A commitment to make software for
the Mac and an investment."

Although the negotiations went quickly, the final details were not
finished until hoursbefore Jobs's Macworld speech in Boston. He was

rehearsing at the Park Plaza Casde when his cell phone rang. "Hi,
Bill," he said as his words echoedthrough the old hall. Then he walked
to a corner and spoke in a soft tone so others couldn't hear. The call
lasted an hour. Finally, the remaining deal points were resolved. "Bill,
thank you for your support of this company," Jobs said as he crouched
in his shorts. "I think the world's a better place for it."
During his Macworld keynote address, Jobs walked through the
details ofthe Microsoft deal. At first therewere groans and hisses from
the faithful. Particularly galling was Jobs's announcement that, as part
of the peace pact, "Apple has decided to make Internet Explorer its
default browser on the Macintosh." The audience erupted in boos,
and Jobs quickly added, "Since we believe in choice, we're going to be
shipping other Internet browsers, as well, and the user can, of course,
change their default should they choose to." There were some laughs
and scattered applause. The audience was beginning to come around,
especially when he announced that Microsoft would beinvesting $150
millionin Apple and getting nonvoting shares.
But the mellower mood was shattered for a moment when Jobs

made oneofthe fewvisual and public relations gaffes ofhisonstage ca
reer. "I happen to have aspecial guest with me today via satellite down
link," he said, and suddenly Bill Gates's face appeared on the huge
screen looming over Jobs and the auditorium. There was a thin smile
on Gates's face that flirted with beinga smirk. The audience gasped in
horror, followed by some boos and catcalls. The scene was such abrutal
echo of the 1984 Big Brother ad that you halfexpected (and hoped?)
that an athletic woman would suddenly come running down the aisle
andvaporize the screenshot with awell-thrown hammer.

326

Walter Isaacson

But it was all for real, and Gates, unaware of the jeering, began
speaking on the satellite link from Microsoft headquarters. "Some of
the most exciting work that I've done in my career has been the work
that I've done with Steve on the Macintosh," he intoned in his highpitched singsong. As he went on to tout the new version of Microsoft

Office that was being made for the Macintosh, the audience quieted
down and then slowly seemed to accept the newworld order. Gates
even was able to rouse some applause when he said that the new Mac
versions of Word and Excel would be "in many ways more advanced
than whatwe've done on theWindows platform."
Jobs realized that the image of Gates looming over him and the
audience was a mistake. "I wanted him to come to Boston," Jobs later

said. "Thatwas my worst and stupidest staging event ever. It was bad
because it made me look small, and Apple look small, and as if every
thing was in Bill's hands." Gates likewise was embarrassed when he

saw thevideotape of the event. "I didn't know that my face was going
to be blown up to looming proportions," he said.
Jobs tried to reassure the audience with an impromptu sermon. "If
wewant to move forward and see Apple healthy again, we have to let

go of a few things here," he told the audience. "We have to let go of
this notion that for Apple to win Microsoft has to lose

I think if

we want Microsoft Office on the Mac, we belter treat the company
that puts it out with a littlebit of gratitude."

The Microsoft announcement, along with Jobs's passionate reengagement with the company, provided a much-needed jolt for Apple.
Bythe endof the day, its stock hadskyrocketed $6.56, or 33%, to close
at $26.31, twice the price of the day Amelio resigned. The one-day
jump added $830 million to Apple's stock market capitalization. The
company was backfrom the edge of the grave.

CHAPTER

TWENTY-FIVE

THINK DIFFERENT
Jobs as iCEO

Enlisting Picasso

Here's to the Crazy Ones
Lee Clow, the creative director at Chiat/Day who had done the great
"1984" ad for the launch of the Macintosh, was driving in Los Angeles

in early July 1997when his car phone rang. It was Jobs. "Hi, Lee, this
is Steve," he said. "Guess what? Amelio just resigned. Can you come
up here?"
Apple was going through a review to select a new agency, and Jobs
327

328

Walter Isaacson

was not impressed by what he had seen. So he wanted Clow and his

firm, by then called TBWA\Chiat\Day, to compete for the business.
"We have to prove that Apple is still alive," Jobs said, "and that it still
stands for somethingspecial."
Clow said that he didn't pitch for accounts. "You know our work,"
he said. ButJobs begged him. It would be hard to reject all the others
that were making pitches, including BBDO and Arnold Worldwide,
and bring back "an old crony," as Jobs put it. Clow agreed to fly up
to Cupertino with something they could show. Recounting the scene
years later, Jobs started to cry.
This chokes me up, this really chokes me up. It was so clear that Lee
loved Apple so much. Here was the best guy in advertising. And he
hadn't pitched in ten years. Yet here he was, and he was pitching his
heart out,because he loved Apple as much aswe did. He and his team
had come up with this brilliantidea,"Think Different."And it was ten

times better than anything theother agencies showed. It choked me up,
and it still makes me cry to think about it, both the fact that Lee cared

so much and also how brilliant his "Think Different" idea was. Every
once in a while, I find myselfin the presence of purity—purity of spirit
andlove—and I always cry. It always just reaches in andgrabs me. That
was one of those moments. There was a purityabout that I will never
forget. I cried in my office as hewas showing me the idea, andI still cry
when I think about it.

Jobs and Clow agreed that Apple was one of the great brands of
theworld, probably in thetopfive based on emotional appeal, but they
needed to remind folks whatwas distinctive aboutit. So theywanted a
brand image campaign, not a setof advertisements featuring products.
It was designed to celebrate not what the computers could do, but
what creative people could do with the computers. "This wasn't about
processor speed or memory," Jobs recalled. "It was about creativity." It
was directed not only at potential customers, but also at Apple's own
employees: "We at Apple had forgotten who we were. One way to
remember who you are is to remember who your heroes are. That was
the genesis of that campaign."

A Portfolio of Diana Walker Photos
Foralmost thirtyyears, photographer Diana Walker
has had specialaccess to herfriendSteveJobs.
Hereis a selectionfrom herportfolio.

At his home in Woodside, 1982: He was such a perfectionist that he had trouble
buying furniture.

In his kitchen: "Coming back after seven months in Indian villages, I saw the
craziness of the Western world as well as its capacityfor rational thought."

At Stanford, 1982:"How manyof you are virgins? How manyof you have taken LSD?"

With the Lisa: "Picasso had a saying—'good artists copy, great artists steal'—and we
have always been shameless about stealing great ideas."

With John Sculley in CentralPark,1984: "Doyou wantto spend the restof yourlife
selling sugaredwater,or do youwant a chanceto change the world?"

In hisApple office, 1982: Asked if hewanted to do market research, he said, "No,
because customers don't know what they want until we've shown them."

I

At NeXT, 1988: Freed from the constraints at Apple, he indulged his own best and
worst instincts.

With John Lasseter, August 1997: His cherubic face and demeanor masked an artistic
perfectionism that rivaled that ofJobs.

At home working on his Boston Macworld speech afterregaining command of
Apple, 1997: "In that craziness wesee genius."

Sealing the Microsoft
deal by phone with
Gates: "Bill, thank

you for your support
of this company. I
think the world's a

better place for it."

At Boston Macworld, as Gates discusses their deal: "That was my worst and stupidest
staging event ever. It made me look small."

u

With his wife, LaurenePowell, in their backyard in PaloAlto, August 1997: Shewas
the sensible anchor in his life.

13

—

At hishome office in Palo Alto, 2004: "I like living at theintersection ofthehumanities
and technology."

From the Jobs Family Album
In August 20'J1, when Jobs was very ill, we satin his room andwent
through wedding andvacationpicturesfor me to use in this book.

The weddingceremony, 1991: Kobun Chino, Steve's Soto Zen teacher, shooka stick,
struck a gong, lit incense, and chanted.

15

With his proud father Paul Jobs: After Steve'ssister Mona tracked down their
biological father, Steve refused ever to meet him.

left: Cutting the cake
in the shape of Half
Dome with Laurene

and his daughter from
a previous relationship,
Lisa Brennan.

below: Laurene, Lisa,
and Steve: Lisa moved

into their home shortly
afterward and stayed
V
16

through her high
school years.

Steve, Eve, Reed, Erin, and Laurene in Ravello, Italy,2003: Even on vacation,he often
withdrew into his work.

Dangling Eve in Foothills Park,
Palo Alto: "She's a pistol and has
the strongest will of any kid I've
ever met. It's like payback."

19

Ml

With Laurene, Eve, Erin, and Lisa at the Corinth Canalin Greece, 2006: "For young
people, this whole world is the same now."

With Erin in Kyoto,
2010: Like Reed

and Lisa, she got a
special trip to Japan
with her father.

21

/ ^ , *r

22

With Reed in Kenya, 2007: "When I was diagnosed with cancer, I made my deal
with God or whatever, whichwas that I really wantedto seeReedgraduate."

And just one more from Diana Walker: a 2004 portrait at his house in Palo Alto.

Think Different

329

Clow and his team tried a variety of approaches that praised the
"crazy ones" who "think different." They did one video with the Seal
song"Crazy" ("We're never gonnasurvive unless we get a little crazy"),
but couldn't get the rights to it. Then they tried versions using a re
cording of Robert Frost reading"The Road Not Taken" and of Robin
Williams's speeches from Dead Poets Society. Eventually they decided
they needed to write their own text; their draft began, "Here's to the
crazy ones."
Jobs was as demanding as ever. When Clow's team flew up with a
version of the text, he exploded at the youngcopywriter. "This is shit!"
he yelled. "It's advertising agency shit and I hate it." It was the first
time the young copywriter had met Jobs, and he stood there mute.
He never went back. But those who could stand up to Jobs, including
Clow and his teammates Ken Segall and CraigTanimoto,were able to
work with him to create a tone poem that he liked. In its original sixtysecond version it read:

Here's to the crazy ones. The misfits. The rebels. The troublemakers.
The round pegsin the square holes. The oneswho seethings differently.
They're not fond of rules. And they have no respect for the status quo.
You can quote them, disagree with them, glorify or vilify them. About
the only thing you can'tdo is ignore them. Because they changethings.
They push the human race forward. And while some may see them as
the crazyones,we see genius. Because the peoplewho are crazyenough
to think they can change the world are the oneswho do.

Jobs, who could identify with each of those sentiments, wrote some
of the lines himself, including "They push the human race forward."
By the time of the Boston Macworld in early August, they had pro
duced a rough version. They agreedit was not ready, but Jobs used the
concepts, and the "think different" phrase,in his keynote speech there.
"There's a germ of a brilliant idea there," he said at the time. "Apple is
about peoplewho think outside the box,who want to use computers to
help them change the world."
They debated the grammatical issue: If "different" was supposed
to modify the verb "think," it should be an adverb, as in "think dif-

330

Walter Isaacson

ferently." But Jobs insisted that he wanted "different" to be used as a
noun, as in "think victory" or"think beauty." Also, it echoedcolloquial
use, as in "think big." Jobs later explained, "We discussed whether it
was correct before we rah it. It's grammatical, if you think aboutwhat
we're trying to say. It's not think the same, it's think different. Think a
little different, think a lot different, think different. 'Think differently
wouldn't hit the meaning for me."
In order to evoke the spirit of Dead Poets Society, Clow and Jobs
wanted to get Robin Williams to read the narration. His agent said
that Williams didn't do ads, soJobs tried to call him directly. He got
through to Williams's wife, who would not let him talk to the actor
because she knew how persuasive he could be. They also considered
Maya Angelou and Tom Hanks. At a fund-raising dinner featuring
Bill Clinton that fall, Jobs pulledthe president aside and asked him to
telephone Hanks to talk him into it, but the president pocket-vetoed
the request. They ended up with Richard Dreyfiiss, who was a dedi
catedApple fan.
In addition to the television commercials, they created one of
the most memorable print campaigns in history. Each ad featured a
black-and-white portrait of an iconic historical figure with just the
Apple logo and the words "Think Different" in the corner. Making
it particularly engaging was that the faces were not captioned. Some
ofthem—Einstein, Gandhi,Lennon,Dylan,Picasso, Edison,Chaplin,
King—were easy to identify. But others caused people to pause, puzzle,
and maybe ask a friend to put a name to the face: Martha Graham,
Ansel Adams, Richard Feynman, Maria Callas, Frank Lloyd Wright,
JamesWatson, Amelia Earhart.
Most wereJobs's personal heroes. They tended to be creative people
who had taken risks,defied failure, andbet their career on doing things
in a differentway. A photography buff, he became involved in making
sure they had the perfect iconic portraits. "This is not the right picture
of Gandhi,"he eruptedto Clow at one point. Clow explained that the
famous Margaret Bourke-White photograph of Gandhi at the spin
ning wheel was owned by Time-Life Pictures and was not available
for commercial use. So Jobs called Norman Pearlstine, the editor in

chief ofTime Inc., and badgered him into making an exception. He

Think Different

331

called Eunice Shriver to convince her family to release a picture that
he loved, of her brother Bobby Kennedy touring Appalachia, and he
talked to Jim Henson's children personally to get the right shot of the
late Muppeteer.
He likewise calledYoko Ono for a picture of her late husband,John
Lennon. She sent him one, but it was not Jobs's favorite. "Before it ran,

I was in New York, and I went to this smallJapanese restaurant that I
love, and let her know I would be there," he recalled. When he arrived,

she cameoverto his table. "This is a better one," she said,handing him
an envelope. "I thought I would seeyou,so I had this with me."It was
the classic photo of her andJohn in bed together, holdingflowers, and
it was the one that Apple ended up using. "I can see whyJohn fell in
love with her,"Jobs recalled.

The narration by Richard Dreyfuss worked well, but Lee Clow
had another idea. What if Jobs did the voice-over himself? "You re
ally believe this," Clow told him. "You should do it." So Jobs sat in a

studio, did a few takes, and soon produced a voice track that everyone
liked. The ideawasthat, if they usedit, theywouldnot tell peoplewho
was speaking the words, just as they didn't caption the iconicpictures.
Eventually people would figure out it was Jobs. "This will be really
powerful to have it in your voice," Clow argued. "It will be a way to
reclaim the brand."

Jobs couldn't decide whether to use the version with his voice or to
stickwith Dreyfuss. Finally, the night camewhen they had to ship the
ad; it was due to air, appropriately enough, on the television premiere

of Toy Story. As was often the case, Jobs did not like to be forced to
make a decision. He told Clow to ship both versions; this would give
him until the morning to decide. When morning came, Jobs called
and told them to use the Dreyfuss version. "If we use my voice, when
people find out they will say it's about me," he told Clow. "It's not. It's
about Apple."
Ever since he left the apple commune, Jobs had defined himself,
and by extension Apple,as a childof the counterculture. In ads such as

"Think Different"and "1984," he positioned the Applebrand so that it
reaffirmed his own rebel streak, even after he became a billionaire, and

it allowed other baby boomers and their kids to do the same. "From

332

Walter Isaacson

when I first met him as a young guy, he's had the greatest intuition of
the impact he wants his brand to have on people," said Clow.
Very few other companies or corporate leaders—perhaps none—
could have gotten away with the brilliantaudacity of associating their
brand with Gandhi, Einstein, Picasso, and the Dalai Lama; Jobs was
ableto encourage people to define themselves asanticorporate, creative,
innovative rebels simply by the computer they used. "Steve createdthe
onlylifestyle brand in the tech industry," Larry Ellison said."There are
cars people are proud to have—Porsche, Ferrari, Prius—because what
I drive says something about me. People feel the same way about an
Apple product."

Starting with the "Think Different" campaign, and continuing
through the rest of his years at Apple, Jobs held a freewheeling threehour meeting everyWednesday afternoon with his top agency, market
ing, and communications people to kick around messaging strategy.
"There's not a CEO on the planet who deals with marketing the way
Steve does," said Clow. "Every Wednesday he approves each newcom
mercial, print ad, and billboard." At the end of the meeting, he would
often take Clow and his two agency colleagues, Duncan Milner and
James Vincent, to Apple's closely guarded design studio to see what
products were in the works. "He gets very passionate and emotional
when he shows us what's in development," said Vincent. By sharing
with his marketing gurus his passion for the products as they were
being created, hewas able to ensure that almost every ad theyproduced
was infused with his emotion.

iCEO

As he was finishing work on the "Think Different"ad,Jobs did some
different thinking of his own. He decided that he would officially take
overrunning the company, at least on a temporarybasis. He had been
the de facto leadersince Amelio's ouster ten weeks earlier, but only as
an advisor. Fred Anderson had the titular role of interim CEO. On

September 16,1997,Jobs announced that he would take over that title,
which inevitably got abbreviated as iCEO. His commitment was ten-

Think Different

333

tative: He took no salaryand signed no contract. But he was not tenta
tive in his actions.He was in charge, and he did not rule by consensus.

That week he gathered his top managers and staff in the Apple
auditorium for a rally, followed by a picnic featuring beer and vegan
food, to celebrate his new role and the company's new ads. He was
wearing shorts, walkingaround the campusbarefoot,and had a stubble
of beard."I'vebeen back about ten weeks, working reallyhard," he said,
looking tired but deeply determined. "What we're trying to do is not
highfalutin. We're trying to get back to the basics of great products,
great marketing, and great distribution. Apple has drifted away from
doing the basics reallywell."
For a few moreweeks Jobs and the boardkept lookingfor a perma
nent CEO. Various names surfaced—George M. C. Fisher of Kodak,
Sam Palmisano at IBM, Ed Zander at Sun Microsystems—but most
of the candidates were understandably reluctant to consider becoming
CEO if Jobs was going to remain an active board member. The San
Francisco Chronicle reported that Zander declined to be considered be
cause he "didn'twant Steve lookingover his shoulder, second-guessing
him on every decision." At one point Jobs and Ellison pulled a prank
on a clueless computer consultant who was campaigning for the job;
they sent him an email saying that he had been selected, which caused
both amusement and embarrassment when stories appeared in the
papers that they werejust toyingwith him.
By December it had become clear that Jobs's iCEO status had
evolved from interim to indefinite. As Jobs continued to run the com
pany, the board quietly deactivated its search. "I went back to Apple
and tried to hire a CEO, with the help of a recruiting agency, for al
most four months," he recalled. "But they didn't produce the right
people. That's why I finally stayed. Apple was in no shape to attract
anybody good."

The problem Jobs faced was that running two companies was
brutal. Lookingbackon it, he traced his healthproblems backto those
days:
It was rough, really rough, the worst time in my life. I had a young
family. I had Pixar. I would go to work at 7 a.m. and I'd get back at 9

334

Walter Isaacson

at night, and the kids would be in bed. And I couldrft speak, I literally
couldn't, I wasso exhausted. I couldn't speak to Laurene. All I coulddo
was watch a half hour of TV and vegetate. It got close to killing me. I
was driving up to Pixarand down to Applein a blackPorsche convert
ible, and I startedto get kidney stones. I would rush to the hospital and
the hospitalwouldgive me a shot of Demerol in the butt and eventually
I would pass it.

Despitethe gruelingschedule, the morethatJobs immersedhimself
in Apple, the more he realized that he would not be able to walkaway.
When Michael Dell was asked at a computer trade show in October
1997 what he would do if he were Steve Jobs and taking overApple,
he replied, "I'd shut it down and give the money back to the share
holders." Jobs fired off an emailto Dell. "CEOs are supposed to have
class," it said. "I can see that isn't an opinion you hold." Jobs liked to
stokeup rivalries as a wayto rallyhis team—he had done sowith IBM
and Microsoft—and he did sowith Dell.When he called together his
managers to institute a build-to-order system for manufacturing and
distribution, Jobs used as a backdrop a blown-up picture of Michael
Dell with a target on his face. "We're coming afteryou, buddy," he said
to cheers from his troops.
One of his motivating passions was to build a lasting company. At
age twelve, when he got a summer job at Hewlett-Packard, he learned
that a properly run company could spawn innovation far more than
any single creative individual. "I discovered that the best innovation is
sometimesthe company, the wayyou organizea company," he recalled.
"The wholenotion of howyoubuilda company is fascinating. When I
got the chanceto comebackto Apple,I realized that I would be useless
without the company, and that's why I decided to stay and rebuild it."

Killing the Clones
One of the great debates about Apple was whether it should have
licensed its operating system more aggressively to other computer
makers, the way Microsoft licensed Windows. Wozniak had favored

Think Different

335

that approach from the beginning."We had the most beautiful oper
ating system," he said, "but to get it you had to buy our hardware at
twice the price. That was a mistake. What we should have done was
calculate an appropriate price to license the operating system." Alan
Kay, the star of Xerox PARC who came to Apple as a fellow in 1984,
also fought hard for licensing the Mac OS software. "Software people
are always multiplatform, because you want to run on everything," he
recalled. "And that was a huge battle, probablythe largest battle I lost
at Apple."
Bill Gates,who was building a fortune bylicensing Microsoft's op
erating system, had urged Apple to do the same in 1985, just as Jobs
wasbeing easedout. Gates believed that, evenif Apple took away some
of Microsoft's operating system customers, Microsoft could make
money by creatingversions of its applications software, such as Word
and Excel, for the users of the Macintosh and its clones. "I was try
ing to do everything to get them to be a strong licensor," he recalled.
He sent a formal memo to Sculley making the case. "The industry
has reached the point where it is now impossible for Apple to create
a standard out of their innovative technology without support from,
and the resulting credibility of, other personal computer manufactur
ers," he argued. "Apple should license Macintosh technology to 3-5

significant manufacturers for the development of'Mac Compatibles.'"
Gates got no reply, so he wrote a secondmemo suggesting some com
panies that wouldbe good at cloning the Mac, and he added, "I want
to help in anywayI canwith the licensing. Please give me a call."
Apple resisted licensing out the Macintosh operating system until
1994, when CEO Michael Spindler allowed two small companies,
Power Computing and Radius, to makeMacintosh clones. When Gil
Amelio took over in 1996, he added Motorola to the list. It turned out

to be a dubious business strategy: Apple got an $80 licensing fee for
each computer sold, but instead of expanding the market, the doners
cannibalized the sales of Apple's own high-end computers,on which it
made up to $500 in profit.
Jobs's objections to the cloning program were not just economic,
however. He had an inbred aversion to it. One of his core principles
was that hardware and software shouldbe tightly integrated. He loved

336

Walter Isaacson

to control all aspects of his life,and the onlyway to do that with com
puters was to take responsibility for the user experience from end
to end.

So upon his return to Apple he made killing the Macintosh clones
a priority. When a new version of the Mac operating system shipped
in July 1997, weeks after he had helped oust Amelio, Jobs did not
allow the clone makers to upgrade to it. The head of Power Comput
ing, Stephen"King" Kahng, organized pro-cloning protests whenJobs
appeared at Boston Macworld that August and publicly warned that
the Macintosh OS would die if Jobs declined to keep licensing it out.

"Ifthe platform goes closed, it isover," Kahng said. "Total destruction.
Closed is the kiss of death."

Jobs disagreed. He telephoned Ed Woolard to say he was getting
Apple out of the licensing business. The board acquiesced, and in Sep
tember he reached a deal to pay Power Computing $100 million to
relinquish its license and give Apple access to its database of custom
ers. He soon terminated the licenses of the other doners as well. "It

was the dumbest thing in the world to let companies making crappier
hardwareuse our operating system and cut into our sales," he later said.

Product Line Review

One of Jobs's great strengths was knowing how to focus. "Deciding
what not to do is as important as deciding what to do," he said. "That's
true for companies, and it's true for products."
He went to work applying this principle as soon as he returned to
Apple. One day he waswalking the halls and ran into a youngWhar
ton Schoolgraduate who had been Amelio's assistant and who said he
waswrapping up his work."Well, good,because I need someoneto do
grunt work,"Jobs told him. His new rolewas to take notes asJobs met
with the dozens of productteams at Apple, asked them to explain what
they were doing, and forced them to justify going ahead with their
products or projects.
He alsoenlisteda friend,Phil Schiller, who had worked at Apple but
was then at the graphics software company Macromedia. "Stevewould

Think Different

337

summon the teams into the boardroom, which seats twenty, and they

would come with thirty people and try to show PowerPoints, which
Steve didn't want to see," Schillerrecalled. One of the first things Jobs

did during the product review process was ban PowerPoints. "I hate
the way people use slide presentations instead of thinking," Jobs later
recalled. "People wouldconfront a problem by creating a presentation.
I wanted them to engage, to hash things out at the table, rather than
show a bunch of slides. People who knowwhat they're talking about
don't need PowerPoint."

The product review revealed how unfocused Apple had become.
The company was churning out multiple versions of each product be
cause of bureaucratic momentum and to satisfy the whims of retailers.
"It was insanity," Schiller recalled. "Tons of products, most of them
crap, donebydeluded teams." Apple had a dozen versions of the Mac
intosh, each with a different confusing number, ranging from 1400 to
9600. "I had people explaining this to mefor threeweeks,"Jobssaid. "I
couldn't figure it out." He finally began asking simple questions, like,
"Which ones do I tell my friends to buy?"
When he couldn't get simple answers, he began slashing away at
models and products. Soon he had cut 70% of them. "You are bright
people," he told one group. "You shouldn't be wasting your time on
such crappy products." Many of the engineers were infuriated at his
slash-and-burn tactics, which resultedin massive layoffs. But Jobs later
claimed that the good engineers, including some whose projects were
killed, were appreciative. He toldonestaffmeeting in September 1997,
"I came out of the meeting with people whohadjust gotten their prod
ucts canceled and they were three feet off the ground with excitement
because they finally understood where in the heckwewere going."
After a few weeks Jobs finally had enough. "Stop!" he shouted at
one big product strategy session. "This is crazy." He grabbed a magic
marker, padded to a whiteboard, and drew a horizontal and vertical
line to make a four-squared chart."Here's what we need," he contin
ued.Atop the two columns he wrote"Consumer" and "Pro"; he labeled
the two rows "Desktop" and "Portable." Their job, he said,was to make
four great products, one for each quadrant. "The room was in dumb
silence," Schiller recalled.

338

Walter Isaacson

There was also a stunned silence when Jobs presented the plan to
the September meeting of the Apple board. "Gil had been urging us
to approve more and more products every meeting," Woolard recalled.
"He kept saying we need more products. Steve came in and said we
needed fewer. He drew amatrix with four quadrants and said thatthis
was where we should focus." At first the board pushed back. It was a
risk, Jobs was told. "I can make it work," he replied. The board never
voted on the newstrategy. Jobs was in charge, and he forged ahead.

The result was that the Apple engineers and managers suddenly
became sharply focused on just four areas. For the professional desktop
quadrant, they would work on making the Power Macintosh G3. For
the professional portable, there would be the PowerBook G3. For the
consumer desktop, work wouldbegin on what became the iMac. And
for the consumer portable, they would focus on what would become
the iBook. The "i," Jobs later explained, was to emphasize that the
devices wouldbe seamlessly integrated with the Internet.
Apple's sharper focus meant getting the company out of other

businesses, such as printers and servers. In 1997 Apple was selling
StyleWriter color printers that were basically aversion of the HewlettPackard DeskJet. HP made most of its money by selling the ink car
tridges. "I don't understand," Jobs said atthe product review meeting.
"You're going to ship amillion and not make money on these? This is
nuts." He left the room and called the head of HP. Let's tear up our
arrangement, Jobs proposed, and we will get out of the printer busi
ness and just let you do it. Then he came back to the boardroom and

announced the decision. "Steve looked at the situation and instantly
knew we neededto get outside of the box," Schiller recalled.
The most visible decision he made was to kill, once and for all,
the Newton, the personal digital assistant with the almost-good

handwriting-recognition system. Jobs hated it because it was Sculley's
pet project, because it didn't work perfectly, and because he had an
aversion to stylus devices. He had tried to get Amelio to kill it early
in 1997 and succeeded only in convincing him to try to spin off the
division. By late 1997, when Jobs did his product reviews, it was still
around. He later described his thinking:

Think Different

339

If Apple had been in a less precarious situation, I would have drilled
down myselfto figure out howto make it work I didn't trust the people
running it. My gut was that there was some really good technology,
but it was fucked up by mismanagement. Byshutting it down, I freed
up some good engineers who could work on new mobile devices. And
eventually wegot it rightwhen we moved on to iPhones and the iPad.

This ability to focus saved Apple. In his first year back, Jobs laid
off more than three thousand people, which salvaged the company's
balance sheet. For the fiscal year that ended when Jobs became in
terim CEO in September 1997, Apple lost $1.04 billion. "We were
less than ninety days from being insolvent," he recalled. At the Janu
ary 1998 San Francisco Macworld, Jobs tookthe stage where Amelio
had bombed a year earlier. He sported a full beard and a leather jacket
as he touted the newproduct strategy. And for the first time he ended
the presentation with a phrase that he would make his signature coda:
"Oh, and one more thing..." This time the "one more thing" was
"Think Profit." When he said those words, the crowd erupted in ap

plause. Aftertwo years of staggering losses, Apple had enjoyed a prof
itable quarter, making $45 million. For the full fiscal year of 1998, it
would turn in a $309 million profit. Jobs was back, and so was Apple.

CHAPTER

TWENTY-SIX

DESIGN PRINCIPLES
The Studio of Jobs and Ive

Withjony Iveandthe sunflower iMac, 2002

Jony Ive
When Jobs gathered his top management for a pep talkjust after he
became iCEO in September 1997, sitting in the audience was a sensi
tive andpassionate thirty-year-old Britwho was head ofthe company's
design team. Jonathan Ive, known to all as Jony, was planning to quit.
He wassickof the company's focus on profitmaximization rather than
product design. Jobs's talk led him to reconsider. "I remember very
clearly Steve announcing that our goal is not just to make money but
340

Design Principles

341

to make great products," Ive recalled. "The decisions you make based
on that philosophy are fundamentally different from the ones we had
been making at Apple." Ive and Jobs would soon forge a bond that
would leadto the greatest industrial design collaboration of their era.
Ive grew up in Chingford, a town on the northeast edge of Lon
don. His fatherwas a silversmith who taught at the localcollege. "He's
a fantastic craftsman," Ive recalled. "His Christmas gift to me would
be one day of his time in his college workshop, during the Christ
mas break when no one else was there, helping me make whatever
I dreamed up." The only condition was thatJony had to draw by hand
what theyplanned to make. "I always understood the beauty of things
made byhand. I came to realize thatwhatwas really important was the
care that was put into it. What I really despise is when I sense some
carelessness in a product."
Iveenrolled in Newcastle Polytechnic and spenthis spare time and
summers working at a design consultancy. One of his creations was a
pen with a littleball on top that was fun to fiddle with. It helped give
the owner a playful emotional connection to the pen. For his thesis
he designed a microphone and earpiece—in purest white plastic—to
communicate with hearing-impaired kids. His flatwas filled with foam
models he had made to help him perfect the design. He also designed
an ATM machine and a curved phone, both of which won awards
from the Royal Society of Arts. Unlike some designers, he didn'tjust
make beautiful sketches; he also focused on how the engineering and
inner components would work. He had an epiphany in college when
he was able to design on a Macintosh. "I discovered the Mac and felt
I had a connection with the people whowere making this product," he
recalled. "I suddenly understood what a company was, or wassupposed
to be."

After graduation Ive helped to build a design firm in London,
Tangerine, which got a consulting contract with Apple. In 1992 he
moved to Cupertino to take a job in the Apple design department.
He became the head of the department in 1996, the year beforeJobs
returned, but wasn't happy. Amelio had little appreciation for design.
"There wasn't that feeling of putting care into a product, because we
were trying to maximize the money we made," Ive said. "All they

342

Walter Isaacson

wanted from us designers was a model ofwhat something was sup
posed to looklike on the outside, and then engineers would make it
as cheap as possible. I was about to quit."
When Jobs took over and gave his pep talk, Ive decided to stick
around. ButJobs at first looked around for aworld-class designer from
the outside. He talked to Richard Sapper, who designed the IBM
ThinkPad, andGiorgetto Giugiaro, who designed the Ferrari 250 and
theMaserati Ghibli. Butthen he took a tour ofApple's design studio
andbonded withthe affable, eager, andvery earnest Ive. "We discussed
approachesto forms and materials," Ive recalled. "We were on the same

wavelength. I suddenly understood why I loved the company."
Ive reported, at least initially, to Jon Rubinstein, whom Jobs had
brought in to head the hardware division, but he developed a direct
andunusually strong relationship withJobs. Theybegan to have lunch
together regularly, andJobs would endhis day bydropping byIve's de
signstudio for a chat."Jony had a special status," saidLaurene Powell.
"He would come by our house, and our families became close. Steve
is never intentionally wounding to him. Most people in Steve's lifeare
replaceable. But not Jony."
Jobs described to me his respect for Ive:
The difference thatJony has made, not only at Apple but in the world,
is huge. He is a wickedly intelligent person in allways. He understands
business concepts, marketing concepts. He picks stuffup just like that,,
click. He understands what we do at our core better than anyone. If
I had a spiritual partner at Apple, its Jony. Jony and I think up most
of the products together andthenpull others in andsay, "Hey, what do
you think about this?" He gets the big picture as well as the most in

finitesimal details about each product. And he understands that Apple
is a product company. He's not just a designer. That's whyhe works di
rectly forme. He has more operational power thananyone else at Apple
except me.There's no one who can tell him what to do, or to butt out.
That's the way I set it up.

Like most designers, Ive enjoyed analyzing the philosophy and
the step-by-step thinking that went into a particular design. For

Design Principles

343

Jobs, the process was more intuitive. He would point to models and
sketches he liked anddump on the ones he didn't. Ive would then take
the cues and develop the concepts Jobs blessed.
Ive was a fan of the German industrial designer Dieter Rams, who
worked for the electronics firm Braun. Rams preached the gospel of
"Less butbetter," Weniger aber besser, and likewiseJobs andIve wrestled
with each new design to see how much they could simplify it. Ever
since Apple's first brochure proclaimed "Simplicity is the ultimate so
phistication," Jobs had aimed for the simplicity that comes from con

quering complexities, notignoring them. "It takes a lot of hard work,"
he said, "to make something simple, to trulyunderstand the underlying
challenges and come up with elegant solutions."
In Ive, Jobs met his soul mate in the quest for true rather than
surface simplicity. Sitting in his design studio, Ive described his phi
losophy:
Why doweassume thatsimple isgood? Because withphysical products,
we haveto feelwe can dominate them. As you bring order to complex

ity, you find a way to make the product defer to you. Simplicity isn't
just a visual style. It's not just minimalism or the absence of clutter.
It involves digging through the depth of the complexity. To be truly
simple, you have to go really deep. For example, to have no screws on
something, you can end up having a product that is so convoluted and
socomplex. The betterway isto godeeper withthe simplicity, to under
standeverything aboutit and howit's manufactured. You have to deeply
understand the essence of a product in orderto be able to get rid of the
parts that are not essential.

That was the fundamental principle Jobs and Ive shared. Design was
not just about what a product looked like on the surface. It had to
reflect the product's essence. "In most people's vocabularies, design
means veneer," Jobs told Fortune shortly after retaking the reins at
Apple. "But to me, nothing could be further from the meaning of de
sign. Designis the fundamental soul of a man-made creation that ends
up expressing itself in successive outer layers."
As a result, the process of designing a product at Apple was inte-

344

Walter Isaacson

grally related to how it would be engineered and manufactured. Ive

described one ofApple's Power Macs. "We wanted to get rid of any
thing other than what was absolutely essential," he said. "To do so
required total collaboration between the designers, the product devel
opers, theengineers, and the manufacturing team. We kept going back

to the beginning, again and again. Dowe need thatpart? Can we get
it to perform the function of the other four parts?"
The connection between the design of a product, its essence, and
its manufacturing was illustrated for Jobs and Ive when they were
traveling in France and went into a kitchen supply store. Ive picked
up a knife he admired, but then put it down in disappointment. Jobs
did the same. "We both noticed a tiny bit of glue between the handle
and the blade," Ive recalled. They talked about how the knife's good
design had beenruined bythe way it was manufactured. "Wedon'tlike
to think of our knives as being glued together," Ive said. "Steve and
I care about things like that, which ruin the purity and detract from
the essence of something like a utensil, and we think alike about how
products should be made to look pure and seamless."
At most other companies, engineering tends to drive design. The
engineers set forth their specifications and requirements, and the de
signers then come up with cases and shells that will accommodate

them. For Jobs, the process tended to work the other way. In the early
days ofApple, Jobs had approved thedesign ofthe case oftheoriginal
Macintosh, and the engineers had to make their boards and compo
nents fit.

After he was forced out, the process at Apple reverted to being
engineer-driven. "Before Steve came back, engineers would say 'Here
are the guts'—processor, hard drive—and then it would go to the de
signers to put it in a box," said Apple's marketing chief Phil Schiller.

"When you do it that way, you come up with awful products." But
when Jobs returned and forged his bond with Ive, the balance was
again tiltedtoward the designers. "Steve keptimpressing on us that the
design was integral to what would make us great," said Schiller. "De
sign once again dictated the engineering, not just vice versa."
On occasion this could backfire, such as when Jobs and Ive in
sisted on using a solid piece of brushed aluminum for the edge of the

Design Principles

345

iPhone 4 even when the engineers worried that it would compromise
the antenna. But usually the distinctiveness of its designs—for the
iMac, the iPod, the iPhone, and the iPad—would set Apple apart and
leadto its triumphs in the years after Jobs returned.

Inside the Studio

The design studio where Jony Ive reigns, on the ground floor ofTwo
Infinite Loop on theApple campus, isshielded bytinted windows and
a heavy clad, locked door. Just inside is a glass-booth reception desk
where two assistants guard access. Even high-level Apple employees
are not allowed in without special permission. Most of my interviews
withJonyIve forthisbook were held elsewhere, but oneday in 2010 he
arranged for me to spend an afternoon touring the studio and talking
about how he and Jobs collaborate there.

To the left of the entrance is a bullpen of desks with young design
ers; to the right is the cavernous main room with six long steel tables
for displaying and playing with works in progress. Beyond the main
room is a computer-aided design studio, filled with workstations, that
leads to a room with molding machines to turn what's on the screens
into foam models. Beyond that is a robot-controlled spray-painting
chamber to make the models look real. The look is sparse and indus
trial,with metallic graydecor. Leaves from the trees outside cast mov
ing patterns of light and shadows on the tintedwindows. Techno and
jazz play in the background.
Almost every day when Jobs was healthy and in the office, he
would have lunch with Ive and then wanderby the studio in the after
noon. As he entered, he could survey the tables and see the products
in the pipeline, sense how they fit into Apple's strategy, and inspect
with his fingertips the evolving design of each. Usually it was just the
two of them alone, while the other designers glanced up from .their
work but kept a respectful distance. If Jobs had a specific issue, he
might calloverthe head of mechanical design or another of Ives depu
ties. If something excited him or sparked some thoughts about corpo
rate strategy, he might askthe chiefoperating officer Tim Cook or the

346

Walter Isaacson

marketing head Phil Schiller to come over and join them. Ive described
the usual process:
This great room is the one place in the company where you can look
around andsee everything we have in the works. When Steve comes in,

he willsit at one of these tables. If we're working on a newiPhone, for
example, he might grab a stool and start playing with different models
and feeling them in his hands, remarking on which ones he likes best.
Then he will graze by the other tables, just him and me, to see where

all the other products are heading. He can get a sense of the sweep
of thewhole company, the iPhone and iPad, the iMac and laptop and
everything we're considering. That helps him see where the company
is spending its energy andhow things connect. And he can ask, "Does

doing this make sense, because over here iswhere weare growing alot?"
orquestions like that. He gets to see things in relationship to each other,
which is pretty hard to doin abigcompany. Looking at the models on
these tables, he can see the future for the nextthree years.
Much of the design process is a conversation, a back-and-forth as
we walkaround the tables andplay with the models. He doesn't like to

read complex drawings. He wants to see and feel a model. He's right.
I get surprised when we make a model and then realize it's rubbish,

even though based on the CAD [computer-aided design] renderings it
looked great.

He loves coming in here because it's calm and gentle. It's a paradise
if you're avisual person. There are no formal design reviews, sothere are
no huge decision points.Instead, we canmake the decisions fluid. Since
we iterate every day and never have dumb-ass presentations, we don't
run into majordisagreements.

On this day Ive was overseeing the creation of a new European
powerplug and connector for the Macintosh. Dozens of foam models,

each with the tiniest variation, have been cast and painted for inspec
tion. Some would find it odd that the head of design would fret over
something like this, but Jobs got involved as well. Ever since he had a
special power supply made for the Apple II, Jobs has cared about not

only the engineering but also the design of such parts. His name is

Design Principles

347

listed on the patent for the white power brick used by the MacBook
as well as its magnetic connector with its satisfying click. In fact he is
listed as one of the inventors for 212 different Apple patents in the
United States as of the beginning of 2011.
Ive andJobs have even obsessed over, and patented, the packaging

for various Apple products. U.S. patent D558572, for example, granted
onJanuary 1,2008, isfor theiPod Nano box, with four drawings show
inghow thedevice isnestled in acradle when thebox isopened. Patent
D596485, issued on July 21, 2009, is for the iPhone packaging, with
its sturdy lid and little glossy plastic trayinside.
Early on,Mike Markkula had taught Jobs to "impute"—to under
stand that people do judge a book byits cover—and therefore to make
sure all the trappings and packaging of Apple signaled that therewas
a beautiful gem inside. Whether it's an iPod Mini or a MacBook Pro,
Apple customers know the feeling of opening up the well-crafted box
and finding the product nestled in an inviting fashion. "Steve and I
spend a lot of time on the packaging," said Ive. "I love the process of
unpacking something. You design a ritual of unpacking to make the
product feel special. Packaging can be theater, it can create a story."
Ive, who has the sensitive temperament of an artist, at times got

upset with Jobs for taking too much credit, a habit that has bothered
other colleagues over the years. His personal feelings forJobs were so
intense that at times he got easily bruised. "He will go through a pro
cess of looking at my ideas and say, That's no good. That's not very
good. I like that one,'"Ive said. "And later I will be sitting in the audi
ence and he will be talking about it as if it was his idea. I paymaniacal
attention to where an idea comes from, and I even keep notebooks
filled with my ideas. So it hurts when he takes credit for one of my
designs." Ivealso hasbristled when outsiders portrayedJobs asthe only
ideas guy at Apple."That makes us vulnerable as a company," Ive said
earnestly, his voice soft. But then he paused to recognize the roleJobs
in fact played. "In so many other companies, ideas and great design
get lost in the process," he said. "The ideas that come from me and my
team would have been completely irrelevant, nowhere, if Steve hadn't
been here to push us,workwith us, and drive through all the resistance
to turn our ideas into products."

CHAPTER

TWENTY-SEVEN

THE iMAC
Hello (Again)

Back to the Future

The first great design triumph to come from theJobs-Ive collaboration
was the iMac, a desktop computer aimed at the home consumer mar
ket that was introduced in May 1998. Jobs had certain specifications.
It should be an all-in-one product, with keyboard and monitor and
computerready to use right out ofthe box. It shouldhave a distinctive
design that made a brand statement. And it should sell for $1,200 or
so. (Apple had no computer selling for less than $2,000 at the time.)
"He told us to go backto the roots of the original 1984 Macintosh, an

348

The iMac

349

all-in-one consumer appliance," recalled Schiller. "That meant design
and engineering had to worktogether."
The initial plan was to build a "network computer," a concept
championed by Oracle's Larry Ellison, which was an inexpensive ter
minalwithout ahard drive that wouldmainlybe usedto connectto the
Internet and other networks. But Apple's chief financial officer Fred
Anderson led the push to make the product more robust by adding a
disk drive so it couldbecome a full-fledged desktop computer for the
home. Jobs eventually agreed.
Jon Rubinstein, who was in charge of hardware, adapted the

microprocessor and guts of the PowerMac G3, Apple's high-end pro
fessional computer, for use in the proposed new machine. It would
have a hard drive and a tray for compact disks, but in a rather bold
move, Jobs and Rubinstein decided not to include the usual floppy
diskdrive. Jobs quoted the hockey star Wayne Gretzky's maxim, "Skate
where the puck's going, notwhere it's been." He was abit ahead of his
time, but eventually most computers eliminated floppy disks.
Ive andhis top deputy, DannyCoster, began to sketchout futuristic
designs. Jobs brusquely rejected the dozen foam models they initially
produced, but Ive knew howto guide him gently. Ive agreed that none
of them was quite right, but he pointed out one that had promise. It
was curved, playful looking, and did not seem like an unmovable slab
rootedto the table. "It hasa sense that it'sjust arrived on your desktop
or it'sjust about to hop off andgo somewhere," he toldJobs.
By the next showing Ive had refined the playful model. This time
Jobs, with his binary view of the world, raved that he loved it. He
took the foam prototype and began carrying it around the headquar
ters with him, showing it in confidence to trusted lieutenants and
board members. In its ads Apple was celebrating the glories of being
able to think different, yet until now nothing had been proposed that
was much different from existing computers. Finally, Jobs had some
thing new.
The plastic casing that Ive andCoster proposed wassea-green blue,
later named bondi blue after the color of the water at a beach in Aus

tralia, andit wastranslucent sothat youcould see throughto the inside

350

Walter Isaacson

of the machine. "We were trying to convey a sense of the computer
being changeable based on your needs, to be like a chameleon," said
Ive. "That's why we liked the translucency. You could have color but it
felt so unstatic. Andit came across as cheeky."
Both metaphorically and in reality, the translucency connected the

inner engineering ofthecomputer to theouter design. Jobs had always
insisted that the rows of chips on the circuit boards look neat, even

though they would never be seen. Now they would be seen. Thecasing
would make visible thecare thathad gone into making all components
of the computer and fitting them together. The playful design would
convey simplicity while also revealing the depths that true simplicity
entails.

Even the simplicity of the plastic shell itself involved great com
plexity. Ive and his team worked with Apple's Korean manufacturers
to perfect the process of making the cases, and they even went to a
jellybean factory to studyhow to make translucent colors look entic

ing. The cost of each case was more than $60 per unit, three times
that ofa regular computer case. Other companies would probably have
demanded presentations and studies to showwhether the translucent
case would increase sales enough to justify the extra cost. Jobs asked
for no such analysis.
Topping offthe design was the handle nestled into the iMac. It was

more playful and semiotic than it was functional. This was a desktop
computer; not many people were really going to carryit around. But as
Ive later explained:
Back then, people weren't comfortable with technology. If you're scared
ofsomething, thenyou wonttouch it. I could see mymum being scared
to touch it. So I thought, if there's this handle on it, it makesa relation

ship possible. It's approachable. It's intuitive. It gives you permission to
touch. It gives a sense of its deference to you. Unfortunately, manufac
turinga recessed handle costs a lot of money. At the oldApple, I would
have lost the argument. What was really great about Steve is that he
saw it and said, "That's cool!" I didn't explain all the thinking, but he
intuitively got it. He just knewthat it waspart of the iMac's friendliness
and playfulness.

The iMac

351

Jobs had to fend off the objections of the manufacturing engineers,

supported by Rubinstein, who tended to raise practical cost consid
erations when faced with Ive's aesthetic desires and various design
whims. "When we took it to the engineers," Jobs said,"they came up

with thirty-eight reasons they couldn't do it.AndI said, 'No,no, we're
doing this.' And they said, 'Well, why?' And I said, 'Because I'm the
CEO, and I think it can be done.' And so they kind of grudgingly
did it."

Jobs asked Lee Clowand Ken Segall and others from the TBWA\
ChiatXDay ad team to fly up to see what he had in the works. He
brought them into the guarded design studio and dramatically un
veiled Ive's translucent teardrop-shaped design, which looked like
something from Thejetsons, the animated TV show set in the future.
For a moment they were taken aback. "We were pretty shocked, but
we couldn't be frank," Segall recalled. "Wewere really thinking, 'Jesus,
do theyknow what theyare doing?' It was soradical." Jobs asked them
to suggest names. Segall came back with five options, one of them
"iMac."Jobs didn'tlikeanyof them at first, so Segall came up with an
other list a weeklater, but he saidthat the agency stillpreferred "iMac."
Jobs replied, "I don't hateit thisweek, but I still don't like it."He tried
silk-screening it on some of the prototypes, and the name grew on
him. And thus it became the iMac.

As the deadline for completing the iMac drew near, Jobs's legend
ary temper reappeared in force, especially when he was confronting
manufacturing issues. At one product review meeting, he learned that
the process was going slowly. "He did one of his displays of awesome
fury, and the fury was absolutely pure," recalled Ive. He went around
the table assailing everyone, starting with Rubinstein. "You knowwe're
tryingto save the company here," he shouted, "andyouguys are screw
ing it up!"

Like the original Macintosh team, the iMac crew staggered to
completion just in timeforthe bigannouncement. But not before Jobs
had one last explosion. When it came time to rehearse for the launch
presentation, Rubinstein cobbled together two working prototypes.
Jobs had not seen the final product before, and when he looked at it
onstage he saw a button on the front, under the display. He pushed it

352

Walter Isaacson

and the CD tray opened. "What the fuck is this?!?" he asked, though
not as politely. "None of us said anything," Schiller recalled, "because
he obviously knew what a CD tray was." So Jobs continued to rail.

It was supposed to have a clean CD slot, he insisted, referring to the
elegant slot drives thatwere already to befound in upscale cars. "Steve,
this is exactly the drive I showed you whenwe talked about the com
ponents," Rubinstein explained. "No, there was never a tray, justa slot,"
Jobs insisted. Rubinstein didn't back down. Jobs's fury didn't abate. "I

almost started crying, because it was too late to do anything about it,"
Jobs later recalled.

They suspended the rehearsal, and for a while it seemed as ifJobs
might cancel theentire product launch. "Ruby looked at me as ifto say,
'Am I crazy?'" Schiller recalled. "It was my first product launch with
Steve andthefirst time I saw his mind-set of'Ifit'snot rightwe're not
launching it.'" Finally, they agreed to replace the tray with a slotdrive
for the next version of the iMac. "I'm only going to go ahead with the
launch if you promise we're going to go to slot mode as soon as pos
sible," Jobs said tearfully.
There was also a problem with the video he planned to show. In
it,Jony Ive is shown describing his design thinking andasking, "What
computer would the Jetsons have had? It was like, the future yester
day." At that moment there was a two-second snippet from the car
toon show, showing Jane Jetson looking at a video screen, followed
by another two-second clip of the Jetsons giggling by a Christmas
tree. At a rehearsal a production assistant told Jobs theywould have to
remove the clips because Hanna-Barbera had not given permission to
use them. "Keep it in,"Jobs barked at him. The assistant explained that
there were rules against that. "I don't care," Jobs said. "We're using it."
The clip stayedin.

LeeClow was preparing a series ofcolorful magazine ads, andwhen
he sentJobs the page proofs hegotanoutraged phone call in response.
The blue in the ad, Jobs insisted,was different from that of the iMac.

"You guys don't know whatyou're doing!" Jobs shouted. "I'mgoing to
get someone else to do the ads, because this is fucked up."Clowargued
back. Compare them, he said. Jobs,who was not in the office, insisted

he was right and continued to shout. Eventually Clowgot him to sit

The iMac

353

down with the original photographs. "I finally proved to him that the
blue was the blue was the blue." Years later, on a Steve Jobs discus

sion board on the website Gawker, the following tale appeared from
someone who had worked at the Whole Foods store in Palo Alto a few

blocks from Jobs's home: "I was shagging carts one afternoon when I
saw this silver Mercedes parked in a handicapped spot. Steve Jobs was
inside screaming at his car phone. This was right before the first iMac
was unveiled andI'm prettysure I could make out,'Not. Fucking. Blue.
Enough!!!'"
As always, Jobs was compulsive in preparing for the dramatic un
veiling. Having stopped one rehearsal because he was angry about the
CD drive tray, he stretched out the other rehearsals to make sure the
showwould be stellar. He repeatedly went over the climactic moment
when he would walk across the stage and proclaim, "Say hello to the
new iMac." He wanted the lighting to be perfect so that the translucenceofthe new machinewould be vivid. But after a few run-throughs
he was stillunsatisfied, an echo of his obsession with stagelighting that
Sculley had witnessed at the rehearsals for the original 1984 Macin
tosh launch. He ordered the lights to be brighter and come on earlier,
but that stilldidn'tplease him. Sohejogged down the auditorium aisle
and slouched into a center seat, draping his legs overthe seat in front.
"Let's keep doingit till we get it right, okay?" he said. They made an
other attempt. "No, no," Jobs complained. "This isn't working at all."
The next time, the lights were bright enough, but they came on too
late. "I'm getting tired of asking aboutthis," Jobs growled. Finally, the
iMac shone just right."Oh! Right there! That's great!" Jobs yelled.
A year earlier Jobs had ousted Mike Markkula, his early men
tor and partner, from the board. But he was so proud of what he had
wrought with the new iMac, and so sentimental about its connection
to the original Macintosh, that he invitedMarkkula to Cupertino for
a private preview. Markkulawas impressed. His only objection was to
the new mouse that Ive had designed. It looked like a hockey puck,
Markkula said, and people would hate it. Jobs disagreed, but Mark
kulawas right. Otherwise the machine had turned out to be, as had its
predecessor, insanely great.

354

Walter Isaacson

The Launch, May 6,1998
With the launch of the original Macintosh in 1984,Jobs had created a
new kind of theater: the product debut as an epochal event, climaxed
by a let-there-be-light moment in which the skies part, a light shines
down, the angels sing, and a chorus of the chosen faithful sings "Hal
lelujah." For the grand unveiling of the product that he hoped would
save Apple andagain transform personal computing, Jobs symbolically
chose the Flint Auditorium of De Anza Community College in Cu
pertino, the same venue he hadused in 1984. He would be pulling out
all the stops in order to dispel doubts, rally the troops, enlist support in
the developers' community, andjump-start the marketing of the new
machine. But he was also doing it because he enjoyed playing impre
sario. Putting on a great show piqued his passions in the same way as
putting out a great product.
Displaying his sentimental side, he began with a graceful shout-out
to three people he had invited to be up front in the audience. He had
become estranged from all ofthem, but now he wanted them rejoined.
"I started the company with Steve Wozniak in my parents' garage,
and Steve is here today," he said, pointing him out and prompting
applause. "We werejoined by Mike Markkula and soon after that our
first president, Mike Scott," he continued. "Both of those folks are in
the audience today. And none of us wouldbe here without these three
guys." His eyes misted for a moment as the applause again built. Also
in the audience were Andy Hertzfeld and most of the original Mac
team. Jobs gave them a smile. He believed he was about to do them
proud.

After showing the grid of Apple's newproduct strategy and going
through some slides about the new computer's performance, he was
ready to unveil his newbaby. "This iswhat computers looklike today,"
he said as a picture of a beige set of boxy components and monitor
was projected on the big screen behind him. "And I'd like to take the
privilege of showing you what they are going to look like from today
on."He pulledthe clothfrom the tableat centerstage to reveal the new

The iMac

355

iMac, which gleamed and sparkled as the lights came up on cue. He
pressed the mouse, and as at thelaunch ofthe original Macintosh, the
screen flashed with fast-paced images of all the wondrous things
the computer could do. At the end, the word "hello" appeared in the
same playful script that had adorned the 1984 Macintosh, this time
with the word"again" below it in parentheses: Hello (again). There was
thunderous applause. Jobs stood back and proudly gazed at his new
Macintosh."It looks likeit's from anotherplanet," he said,as the audi
ence laughed. "Agoodplanet. A planet with better designers."
Once again Jobs had produced an iconic new product, this one
a harbinger of a new millennium. It fulfilled the promise of "Think
Different." Instead of beige boxes and monitors with a welterof cables
and a bulky setup manual, here was a friendly and spunky appliance,
smooth to the touch and as pleasing to the eye as a robin's egg. You
could grab its cute little handle and lift it out of the elegant white box
and plug it right into a wall socket. People who had been afraid of
computers nowwantedone, and theywanted to put it in a roomwhere
others could admire and perhaps covet it. "A piece of hardware that
blends sci-fi shimmer with the kitsch whimsy of a cocktail umbrella,"
Steven Levy wrote in Newsweek, "it is not only the coolest-looking
computer introduced in years, but a chest-thumping statement that
Silicon Valley's original dream company is no longer somnambulant."
Forbes called it "an industry-altering success," and John Sculley later
cameout of exile to gush,"He has implemented the same simple strat
egythat madeApple so successful 15 years ago: make hit products and
promote them with terrific marketing."
Carping was heard from only one familiar corner. As the iMac
garnered kudos, Bill Gates assured a gathering of financial analysts
visiting Microsoft that this would be a passing fad. "The one thing
Apple'sprovidingnow is leadership in colors," Gates said as he pointed
to a Windows-based PC that he jokingly had painted red. "It won't
take long for us to catch up with that, I don't think." Jobs was furious,
and he told a reporter that Gates, the man he had publicly decried for
being completely devoid of taste, was clueless about what made the
iMac so much more appealing than other computers. "The thing that

356

Walter Isaacson

our competitors are missing is that they think it's about fashion, and

theythinkit's about surface appearance," he said. "Theysay, We'll slap
alittle color on this piece of junk computer, and we'llhave one, too."
The iMacwent on sale in August 1998 for $1,299. It sold 278,000
units in its first sixweeks, and would sell 800,000 by the end of the
year, making it the fastest-selling computer in Applehistory. Most no
tably, 32% of the sales wentto people whowere buying acomputer for
the first time, and another 12% to people who had been using Win
dows machines.

Ive soon came upwith four newjuicy-looking colors, in addition to
bondi blue, for the iMacs. Offering the same computer in five colors
would of course create huge challenges for manufacturing, inventory,
and distribution. At most companies, including even the old Apple,
there would have been studies and meetings to look at the costs and
benefits. Butwhen Jobs looked atthenewcolors, hegottotally psyched
and summoned other executives over to thedesign studio. "We're going
to do all sorts of colors!" he told them excitedly. When they left, Ive
looked at his teamin amazement. "In most places that decision would
have taken months," Ive recalled."Steve did it in a half hour."

There was one other important refinement that Jobs wanted for
the iMac: getting rid of that detested CD tray. "I'd seen a slot-load
drive on a very high-end Sony stereo," he said, "so I went to the drive
manufacturers and got them to do a slot-load drive for us for the ver

sion of the iMac we did nine months later." Rubinstein tried to argue
him outof the change. He predicted thatnewdrives would come along
that could burn music onto CDs rather than merely play them, and
theywould be available in tray form before theywere made to workin
slots. "If yougo to slots, youwill always be behindon the technology,"
Rubinstein argued.
"I don't care, that's what I want," Jobs snapped back. They were
having lunch at a sushi bar in San Francisco, and Jobs insisted that
they continue the conversation over awalk. "I want you to do the slot-

load drive for me as a personal favor," Jobs asked. Rubinstein agreed,
of course, but he turned out to be right. Panasonic came out with a
CD drive that could rip and burn music, and it was available first for
computers that had old-fashioned tray loaders. The effects of this

The iMac

357

would ripple over the next few years: It would cause Apple to be slow
in catering to users who wanted to rip and burn their own music, but
that would then force Apple to be imaginative and bold in finding a
way to leapfrog over its competitors when Jobs finally realized that he
had to get into the music market.

CHAPTER

TWENTY-EIGHT

CEO
Still Crazy after All These Years

Tim Cook andJobs, 2007

Tim Cook

When Steve Jobs returnedto Apple and produced the "Think Differ
ent" ads and the iMac in his first year, it confirmed what most people
already knew: that he couldbe creative and a visionary. He had shown
that during his first round at Apple.What was less clear was whether
he could run a company. He had definitely notshown that during his
first round.

Jobs threw himself into the task with a detail-oriented realism that
358

CEO

359

astonished those who were used to his fantasy that the rules of this
universe need not apply to him."He became a manager, which is dif
ferent from being an executive or visionary, and that pleasantly sur
prisedme," recalled Ed Woolard, the boardchairwho lured him back.
His management mantra was "Focus." He eliminated excess prod
uct lines and cut extraneous features in the new operating system soft
ware that Apple was developing. He let go of his control-freak desire
to manufacture products in his own factories and instead outsourced
the making of everythingfrom the circuitboards to the finished com
puters. And he enforced on Apples suppliers a rigorous discipline.
When he took over, Apple had more than two months' worth of in
ventorysitting in warehouses, morethan anyother tech company. Like
eggs and milk, computers have a short shelf life, so this amounted to
at least a $500 million hit to profits. By early 1998 he had halved that
to a month.

Jobss successes came at a cost, sincevelvety diplomacywas still not
part of his repertoire. When he decided that a division of Airborne
Express wasn't delivering spare parts quickly enough, he ordered an
Apple manager to break the contract. When the manager protested
that doing so could lead to a lawsuit, Jobs replied, "Just tell them if
they fuck with us, they'll never get another fucking dime from this
company, ever." The manager quit, there was a lawsuit, and it took a
year to resolve. "My stock options would be worth $10 million had I
stayed," the manager said, "but I knew I couldn't have stood it—and
he'd have fired me anyway."The new distributor was ordered to cut in
ventory 75%, and did. "Under SteveJobs, there's zero tolerance for not
performing," its CEO said. At another point, when VLSI Technol
ogywas havingtrouble delivering enough chipson time,Jobs stormed
into a meeting and started shouting that they were "fucking dickless
assholes." The company ended up getting the chips to Apple on time,
and its executives madejacketsthat boastedon the back,"TeamFDA."
ALfter three months of working underJobs,Apple's head of opera
tions decided he could not bear the pressure, and he quit. For almost
a yearJobs ran operations himself, because all the prospects he inter
viewed "seemed like they were old-wave manufacturing people," he
recalled. He wanted someone who could build just-in-time factories

360

Walter Isaacson

and supply chains, as Michael Dell had done.Then, in 1998, he met

Tim Cook, a courtly thirty-seven-year-old procurement and supply
chain manager at Compaq Computers, who not only would become
his operations manager but would grow into an indispensable back
stage partner in running Apple. AsJobs recalled:
Tim Cookcame out ofprocurement, which isjust the rightbackground
forwhatwe needed. I realized that he andI saw things exactly the same
way. I had visited a lot of just-in-time factories in Japan, and I'd built
one for the Mac and at NeXT. I knew what I wanted, and I met Tim,

and he wanted the same thing. So we started to work together, and
before long I trusted him to knowexacdy what to do. He had the same
vision I did, and we could interact at a high strategic level, and I could
just forget abouta lot of things unless he came and pinged me.

Cook, the son of a shipyard worker, wasraised in Robertsdale, Ala
bama, a small town between Mobile and Pensacola a half hour from

the Gulf Coast. He majored in industrial engineering at Auburn, got
a business degree at Duke, and for the next twelve years worked for
IBM in the Research Triangle of North Carolina. When Jobs inter
viewed him, he had recently taken a job at Compaq. He had always
been a verylogical engineer, and Compaq then seemed a moresensible
career option,but he was snared byJobs's aura. "Five minutes into my
initialinterview with Steve, I wantedto throw caution and logicto the
wind andjoin Apple," he latersaid. "Myintuition told me that joining
Apple would be a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to workfor a creative
genius." And so he did."Engineers are taught to make a decision ana
lytically, but there are times when relying on gut or intuition is most
indispensable."
At Apple his role became implementing Jobs's intuition, which he
accomplished with a quiet diligence. Never married, he threw himself
into his work. He wasup most days at 4:30 sendingemails, then spent
an hour at the gym, and was at his desk shortly after 6. He scheduled
Sunday evening conference calls to prepare for each week ahead. In
a company that was led by a CEO prone to tantrums and withering
blasts, Cook commanded situations with a calm demeanor, a sooth-

CEO

361

ing Alabama accent, and silent stares. "Though he's capable of mirth,
Cook's default facial expression is a frown, and his humor is of the dry
variety," Adam Lashinsky wrote in Fortune. "In meetings he's known
for long, uncomfortable pauses, when all you hear is the sound of his
tearingthe wrapper off the energy bars he constantly eats."
At a meeting early in his tenure, Cook was told of a problem with
one of Apple's Chinese suppliers. "This is really bad," he said. "Some
one should be in China driving this." Thirty minutes later he looked
at an operations executive sitting at the table and unemotionally asked,

"Why are you still here?" The executive stood up, drove directly to
the San Francisco airport, and bought a ticket to China. He became
one of Cook's top deputies.
Cook reduced the number of Apple s key suppliers from a hundred
to twenty-four, forced them to cut better deals to keep the business,
convinced many to locate next to Apple's plants, and closed ten of the
company's nineteen warehouses. Byreducing the places where inven
tory could pile up, he reduced inventory. Jobs had cut inventory from
two months' worth of product down to onebyearly 1998. BySeptem
berofthat year, Cook hadgotten it down to six days. By the following
September, it was down to an amazing two days' worth. In addition, he
cut the production process for making an Apple computer from four
months to two. All of this not onlysaved money, it also allowed each
new computer to have the verylatestcomponents available.

Mock Turtlenecks and Teamwork

On a triptoJapan in theearly 1980s,Jobs asked Sony's chairman, Akio
Morita, why everyone in his company's factories wore uniforms. "He
looked very ashamed and told me that after the war, no one had any
clothes, and companies like Sony had to give their workers something
to wear each day,"Jobs recalled. Over theyears the uniforms developed
their own signature style, especially at companies such as Sony, and
it became a way of bonding workers to the company. "I decided that
I wanted that type of bonding forApple," Jobs recalled.
Sony, with itsappreciation for style, had gotten thefamous designer

362

Walter Isaacson

Issey Miyake to create one of its uniforms. It was a jacket made of
ripstop nylon with sleeves that could unzip to make it a vest. "So I
called Issey and asked him to design a vestfor Apple," Jobs recalled. "I
came back with some samples and told everyone it would be great if
we would all wear these vests. Oh man, did I get booed off the stage.
Everybody hated the idea."
In the process, however, he became friends with Miyakeand would
visit him regularly. He also came to like the idea of having a uniform
for himself, because of both its daily convenience (the rationale he
claimed) and its ability to convey a signature style. "So I askedIsseyto
make me some of his black turdenecks that I liked, and he made me

like a hundred of them." Jobs noticed my surprise when he told this
story, so he gestured to them stacked up in the closet. "That's what I
wear," he said."I have enough to last for the rest of my life."
Despite his autocratic nature—he never worshipped at the altar
of consensus—Jobs worked hard to foster a culture of collaboration

at Apple. Many companies pride themselves on havingfew meetings.
Jobs had many: an executive staff session every Monday, a marketing
strategy session all Wednesday afternoon, and endless product review
sessions. Still allergic to PowerPoints and formal presentations, he in
sisted that the people around the table hash out issues from various
vantages and the perspectives of different departments.
Because he believed that Apple's great advantage was its integra
tion of the whole widget—from design to hardware to software to
content—he wanted all departments at the company to work together
in parallel. The phrases he used were "deep collaboration" and "con
current engineering." Instead of a development process in which a
product would be passed sequentially from engineering to design to
manufacturing to marketing and distribution, these various depart
ments collaborated simultaneously. "Our method was to develop inte
grated products, and that meant our process had to be integrated and
collaborative,"Jobs said.

This approach also applied to key hires. He would have candidates
meet the top leaders—Cook, Tevanian, Schiller, Rubinstein, Ive—
rather than just the managers of the department where they wanted
to work."Then we all get togetherwithout the person and talk about

CEO

363

whetherthey'llfit in,"Jobssaid. His goalwas to be vigilant against "the
bozo explosion" that leads to a company's being larded with secondrate talent:

For most things in life, the range between best and average is 30% or
so. The best airplane flight, the best meal, they maybe 30% better than
your average one.What I saw with Woz was somebody who was fifty
times better than the average engineer. He could have meetings in his
head.The Mac team was an attempt to build a whole team like that,
A players. People said theywouldn't get along, they'd hateworking with
each other. But I realized that A players like to work with A players,
they just didn't like working with C players. At Pixar, it was a whole
company of A players. When I got backto Apple, that's what I decided
to try to do. You need to have a collaborative hiringprocess. When we
hire someone, even if theyre going to be in marketing, I willhave them
talk to the design folks and the engineers. My role modelwasJ. Robert
Oppenheimer. I read about the type of people he sought for the atom
bomb project. I wasn't nearly as good as hewas, but that's whatI aspired
to do.

The process could be intimidating, butJobs had an eye for talent.
When they were looking for people to design the graphical interface
for Apple's new operating system, Jobs gotanemail from a young man
and invited him in. The applicant was nervous, and the meeting did
not go well. Later that day Jobs bumped into him, dejected, sitting in
the lobby. The guyasked if he could just show him one of his ideas, so
Jobs looked over his shoulder and saw a little demo, using Adobe Di
rector, of a wayto fit more icons in the dock at the bottom of a screen.
When the guy movedthe cursoroverthe iconscrammed into the dock,
the cursor mimicked a magnifying glass and made each icon balloon

bigger. "I said, 'My God,' andhired him on the spot,"Jobsrecalled. The
feature became a lovable part ofMac OSX, and the designer went on
to design such things as inertial scrolling for multi-touch screens (the
delightful feature that makes the screen keep gliding for a moment
afteryou've finished swiping).
Jobs's experiences at NeXT had matured him, but they had not

364

Walter Isaacson

mellowed him much. He still had no license plate on his Mercedes,
and he still parked in the handicapped spaces next to the front door,
sometimes straddling two slots. It became a running gag. Employees
made signs saying, "Park Different," and someone painted over the
handicapped wheelchair symbol with a Mercedes logo.
Peoplewere allowed, evenencouraged, to challenge him, and some
times he would respectthem for it. But you had to be prepared for him
to attack you,evenbite yourhead off, as he processed your ideas. "You
neverwin an argument with him at the time, but sometimes you even
tuallywin,"saidJames Vincent,the creative young adman who worked
with Lee Clow. "You propose something and he declares, 'That's a stu
pid idea,'and later he comes backand says, 'Here's what we're going to
do.' And you want to say, 'That's what I told you two weeks ago and
you said that's a stupid idea.' But you can't do that. Instead you say,
That's a great idea, let's do that.'"
People also had to put up withJobs's occasional irrationalor incor
rect assertions. To both family and colleagues, he was apt to declare,
with great conviction, some scientific or historical fact that had scant
relationship to reality. "There can be something he knows absolutely
nothing about, and because of his crazy style and utter conviction, he
can convince people that he knows what he's talking about," said Ive,
who described the trait asweirdly endearing. Yetwith his eye for detail,
Jobs sometimes correctly pounced on tiny things others had missed.
Lee Clow recalled showing Jobs a cut of a commercial, making some
minor changes he requested, and then being assaulted with a tirade
about how the ad had been completely destroyed. "He discovered we
had cut two extra frames, something so fleeting it was nearly impos
sible to notice,"said Clow. "But he wanted to be sure that an image hit
at the exact moment as a beat of the music, and he was totally right."

From iCEO to CEO

Ed Woolard, his mentor on the Apple board, pressed Jobs for more
than two years to drop the interim in front of his CEO title. Not only
was Jobs refusing to commit himself, but he was baffling everyone by

CEO

365

taking only $1 a yearin pay and no stockoptions. "I make 50 cents for
showing up," he liked to joke,"andthe other 50 cents is basedon per
formance." Since his return in July 1997, Apple stock had gone from
just under $14 to just over $102 at the peak of the Internet bubble
at the beginning of 2000. Woolard had begged him to take at least a
modeststockgrant backin 1997, butJobshad declined, saying, "I don't
want the people I workwith at Appleto think I am comingbackto get
rich." Had he accepted that modest grant, it would have been worth
$400 million. Instead he made $2.50 during that period.
The main reason he clung to his interim designation was a sense of
uncertainty aboutApple's future. But as 2000 approached, it was clear
that Apple had rebounded, and it was because of him. He took a long
walkwith Laurene and discussed what to mostpeople by nowseemed
a formality but to him was still a big deal. If he dropped the interim
designation, Apple could be the base for all the things he envisioned,
including the possibility of getting Apple into products beyond com
puters. He decided to do so.
Woolard was thrilled, and he suggested that the board was will
ing to give him a massive stockgrant. "Let me be straight with you,"
Jobs replied. "What I'd rather have is an airplane. We just had a third
kid. I don't like flying commercial. I like to take my family to Hawaii.
When I go east, I'd like to have pilots I know." He was never the type
of person who could display grace and patience in a commercial air
plane or terminal, even before the days of the TSA. Board member
LarryEllison, whose plane Jobs sometimes used (Apple paid $102,000
to Ellisonin 1999forJobs's useof it), had no qualms. "Givenwhat he's
accomplished, we should give him five airplanes!" Ellison argued. He
later said, "It was the perfect thank-you gift for Steve, who had saved
Apple and gotten nothingin return."
So Woolard happily granted Jobs's wish, with a Gulfstream V, and
also offered him fourteen million stock options. Jobs gave an unex
pected response. He wanted more: twenty million options. Woolard
was baffled and upset. The board had authorityfrom the stockholders
to give out only fourteen million. "You said you didn't want any, and
we gaveyou a plane, which you did want,"Woolard said.
"I hadn't been insisting on options before," Jobs replied, "but you

366

Walter Isaacson

suggested it could be up to 5% of the company in options, and that's
what I now want." It was an awkward tiffin what should have been a

celebratory period.In the end, a complex solution wasworkedout that
granted him ten million shares in January 2000 that were valued at
the current price but timed to vest as if granted in 1997, plus another
grant due in 2001. Making matters worse, the stockfellwith the burst
of the Internet bubble. Jobs never exercised the options,and at the end
of 2001 he asked that they be replaced by a new grant with a lower
strikeprice. The wrestling over options would comeback to haunt the
company.

Even if he didn't profit from the options, at least he got to enjoy
the airplane. Not surprisingly he fretted over how the interior would
be designed. It took him more than a year. He used Ellison's plane as
a startingpoint and hired his designer. Pretty soon he was driving her
crazy. For example, Ellison's had a door between cabins with an open
button and a close button. Jobs insisted that his have a single button
that toggled. He didn't like the polished stainless steel of the buttons,
so he had them replaced with brushed metal ones. But in the end he
got the plane he wanted, and he loved it. "I look at his airplane and
mine, and everythinghe changedwas better,"said Ellison.
At the January 2000 Macworld in San Francisco, Jobs rolled out the
new Macintosh operating system, OSX,which used some of the soft
ware that Apple had bought from NeXT three years earlier. It was
fitting, and not entirely coincidental, that he waswilling to incorporate
himselfback at Apple at the same moment as the NeXT OS was in
corporated into Apple's. Avie Tevanian had taken the UNIX-related
Mach kernelof the NeXT operating system and turned it into the Mac
OS kernel, known as Darwin. It offered protected memory, advanced
networking, and preemptive multitasking. It was precisely what the
Macintosh needed, and it would be the foundation of the Mac OS

henceforth. Somecritics, including BillGates,noted that Apple ended
up not adopting the entire NeXToperating system. There's some truth
to that, because Apple decided not to leap into a completely new sys
tem but instead to evolve the existing one. Application software writ
ten for the old Macintosh system was generally compatible with or

CEO

367

easy to port to the new one, and a Mac user who upgraded would
notice a lot of new features but not a whole new interface.

The fans at Macworld received the news with enthusiasm, of

course,and they especially cheeredwhen Jobs showed off the dock and
how the iconsin it couldbe magnified by passingthe cursoroverthem.
But the biggest applause came for the announcement he reserved for
his "Oh, and one more thing" coda. He spoke about his duties at both
Pixar and Apple, and said that he had become comfortable that the
situation could work. "So I am pleased to announce today that I'm
going to drop the interim title," he said with a big smile. The crowd
jumped to its feet, screamingas if the Beatles had reunited.Jobs bit his
Up, adjusted hiswirerims,and put on a graceful showof humility. "You

guys are making me feel funny now. I get to come to work every day
and work with the most talented people on the planet, at Apple and
Pixar. But thesejobs are team sports. I accept yourthanks on behalfof
everybody at Apple."

CHAPTER

TWENTY-NINE

APPLE STORES
Genius Bars and Siena Sandstone

New York's FifthAvenue store

The Customer Experience
Jobs hated to cede control of anything, especially when it might affect
the customer experience. But he faced a problem. There was one part
of the process he didn't control: the experience of buying an Apple
product in a store.
The days of the Byte Shop were over. Industry sales were shifting
from local computer specialty shops to megachains and big box stores,
where most clerks had neither the knowledge nor the incentive to ex
plain the distinctive nature of Apple products. "All that the salesman
cared about was a $50 spiff," Jobs said. Other computers were pretty
368

Apple Stores

369

generic, but Apple's had innovative features and a higher price tag.
He didn't want an iMac to sit on a shelf between a Dell and a Com

paq while an uninformed clerk recited the specs of each. "Unless we
could find ways to get our message to customers at the store, we were
screwed."

In great secrecy, Jobs began in late 1999 to interview executives

who might be able to develop a string of Apple retail stores. One of
the candidates had a passion for design and the boyish enthusiasm of a
natural-born retailer: RonJohnson, the vice presidentfor merchandis
ing at Target, who was responsible for launching distinctive-looking
products, such as a teakettle designed by Michael Graves. "Steve is
very easy to talk to," said Johnson in recalling their first meeting. "All
of a sudden there's a torn pair ofjeans and turdeneck, and he's off and
running aboutwhyhe needed greatstores. IfAppleis goingto succeed,
he told me, we're going to win on innovation. And you can't win on
innovation unless you have a wayto communicate to customers."
When Johnson came back in January 2000 to be interviewed
again, Jobs suggested that they take a walk. They went to the sprawl
ing 140-store Stanford Shopping Mall at 8:30 a.m.The stores weren't
open yet, so they walked up and down the entire mall repeatedly and
discussed how it was organized, what role the big department stores
played relative to the other stores, and why certain specialty shopswere
successful.

They were still walking and talkingwhen the stores opened at 10,
and they went into Eddie Bauer. It had an entrance off the mall and
another off the parkinglot.Jobs decided that Apple storesshould have
only one entrance, which would make it easier to control the experi
ence. And the Eddie Bauerstore, they agreed, wastoo long and narrow.
It was important that customers intuitively grasp the layout of a store
as soon as they entered.

There were no tech stores in the mall, andJohnson explained why:
The conventional wisdom was that a consumer, when making a major
and infrequent purchase such as a computer, would be willing to drive
to a less convenient location, where the rent would be cheaper. Jobs
disagreed. Apple stores should be in malls and on Main Streets—in
areaswith a lot of foot traffic, no matter how expensive. "We may not

370

Walter Isaacson

be able to get them to drive ten miles to check out ourproducts, but
we can getthem towalk tenfeet," hesaid. TheWindows users, in par
ticular, had tobeambushed: "Ifthey're passing by, they will drop in out
ofcuriosity, ifwe make it inviting enough, and once we get a chance to
show them what we have, we will win."

Johnson said that the size of a store signaled the importance of the
brand. "Is Apple as big of a brand as the Gap?" he asked. Jobs said it
was much bigger. Johnson replied that its stores should therefore be
bigger. "Otherwise youwon'tbe relevant." Jobs described Mike Mark-

kulas maxim that a good company must "impute"—it must convey its
values and importance in everything it does, from packaging to mar
keting. Johnson loved it. It definitely applied to a company's stores.
"The store will become the most powerful physical expression of the
brand," he predicted. He said that when he was young he had gone
to the wood-paneled, art-filled mansion-like store that Ralph Lauren
had created at Seventy-second and Madison in Manhattan. "When

ever I buy a polo shirt, I think of that mansion, which was a physical
expression of Ralph's ideals," Johnson said. "Mickey Drexler did that
with the Gap. You couldn't think of a Gap product without thinking
of the greatGap store with the clean space and woodfloors and white
walls and folded merchandise."

When they finished, they drove to Apple and sat in a conference
room playing with the company's products. There weren't many, not
enough to fill the shelves of a conventional store, but that was an ad

vantage. The type of store theywould build, theydecided, would ben
efit from having few products. It would be minimalist and airy and
offer a lot of places for people to try out things. "Most people don't
know Apple products," Johnson said. "They think of Apple as a cult.
You want to move from a cultto something cool, and having an awe
some store where people can try things will help that." The stores
would impute the ethos of Apple products: playful, easy, creative, and
on the bright side of the line between hip and intimidating.

Apple Stores

371

The Prototype
When Jobs finally presented the idea, the board was not thrilled.
Gateway Computers was going down in flames after opening subur
ban stores, andJobs's argument that his would do better because they
would be in more expensive locations was not, on its face, reassuring.
"Think different" and "Here's to the crazy ones" madefor good adver
tising slogans, but the board was hesitant to make them guidelines for
corporate strategy. "I'm scratching myhead and thinking this is crazy,"
recalled Art Levinson, the CEO of Genentech who joined the Apple
board in 2000. "We are a small company, a marginal player. I saidthat
I'm not sure I can support something like this." Ed Woolard was also
dubious. "Gateway has tried this and failed, while Dell is selling direct
to consumers without stores and succeeding," he argued. Jobs was not

appreciative of too much pushback from the board. The last time that
happened, he had replaced most of the members. This time, for per
sonal reasons as well as being tired of playing tug-of-war with Jobs,
Woolard decided to step down. But before he did, the board approved
a trial run of four Apple stores.
Jobs did have one supporter on the board. In 1999he had recruited
the Bronx-born retailing prince Millard "Mickey" Drexler, who as
CEO of Gap had transformed a sleepy chain into an iconofAmerican
casualculture. He was one of the few people in the world who were as
successful and savvy asJobs on matters of design, image, and consumer
yearnings. In addition, he had insisted on end-to-end control: Gap
stores sold only Gap products, and Gap products were sold almost
exclusively in Gap stores. "I left the department storebusiness because
I couldn'tstand not controlling my own product,from how it's manu
factured to how it's sold,"Drexler said."Steve is just that way, which is
why I think he recruited me."
Drexlergave Jobs a piece of advice: Secredy build a prototypeof the
store near the Apple campus, furnish it completely, and then hang out
there until you feel comfortable with it. So Johnson and Jobs rented a
vacant warehouse in Cupertino. EveryTuesday for six months, they
convened an all-morning brainstorming session there, refining their

372

Walter Isaacson

retailing philosophy as they walked the space. It was the store equiva
lent ofIve's design studio, ahaven where Jobs, with his visual approach,
could come up with innovations by touching and seeing theoptions as
they evolved. "I loved towander over there on my own, just checking
it out," Jobs recalled.

Sometimes he made Drexler, Larry Ellison, and other trusted

friends come look. "On too many weekends, when he wasn't making
mewatch new scenes from Toy Story, he made mego to the warehouse
and lookat the mockups for the store," Ellison said. "He was obsessed

by every detail ofthe aesthetic and the service experience. It gotto the
point where I said, 'Steve I'm not coming to see you ifyou're going to
make me go to the store again.'"
Ellison's company, Oracle, was developing software for the hand

held checkout system, which avoided having a cash register counter.
On each visit Jobs prodded Ellison to figure outways to streamline the
process by eliminating some unnecessary step, such as handing over
the credit card or printing a receipt. "Ifyou lookat the stores and the
products, you will see Steve's obsession with beauty as simplicity—
this Bauhaus aesthetic and wonderful minimalism, which goes all the
way to the checkoutprocess in the stores," said Ellison. "It means the

absolute minimum number of steps. Steve gave us the exact, explicit
recipe for how he wanted the checkout to work."

When Drexler came to see the prototype, he had some criticisms:
"I thought the space was too chopped up and not clean enough. There
were too many distracting architectural features and colors." He em

phasized thata customer should beable towalk into a retail space and,
with one sweep of the eye, understand the flow. Jobs agreed that sim
plicity and lackof distractions were keys to a greatstore, as theywere
to a product. "After that, he nailed it," said Drexler. "The vision he had

was complete control ofthe entire experience of hisproduct, from how
it was designed and made to how it was sold."
In October 2000, near whathe thought was the end of the process,
Johnson woke up in the middle of a night before one of the Tues
day meetings with a painful thought: They had gotten something
fundamentally wrong. They were organizing the store around each

Apple Stores

373

of Apple's main product lines, with areas for the PowerMac, iMac,
iBook, and PowerBook. But Jobs had begun developing a new con

cept: the computer as a hub for all your digital activity. In other words,
your computer might handle video and pictures from your cameras,
and perhaps someday your music player and songs, or your books and
magazines. Johnson's predawn brainstorm was that the stores should
organize displays notjust around the company's four lines of comput
ers, but also around things people might want to do. "For example,
I thought there should be a movie bay where we'd have various Macs
and PowerBooks running iMovie and showing how you can import
fromyourvideo camera and edit."
Johnson arrived at Jobs's office early that Tuesday and told him
about his sudden insight that they needed to reconfigure the stores.
He had heard tales of his boss's intemperate tongue, but he had not yet
feltits lash—until now. Jobs erupted. "Doyou know whata bigchange
this is?" he yelled. "I've worked my ass offon this store for six months,
and now you want to change everything!" Jobs suddenly got quiet.
"I'm tired. I don't knowif I can design another store from scratch."
Johnson was speechless, and Jobs made sure he remained so. On
the ride to the prototype store, where people had gathered for the
Tuesday meeting, he told Johnson not to say a word, either to him
or to the other members of the team. So the seven-minute drive pro
ceeded in silence. When they arrived, Jobs had finished processing
the information. "I knew Ron was right," he recalled. So to Johnson's
surprise, Jobs opened the meeting by saying, "Ron thinks we've got it
all wrong. He thinks it should be organized not around products but
instead around what people do." There was a pause, then Jobs contin
ued. "And you know, he's right." He said they would redo the layout,
even though it would likely delay the planned January rollout by three
or four months. "We've only got one chance to get it right."
Jobs liked to tell the story—and he did so to his team that day—
about how everything that he had done correctiy had required a mo
ment when he hit the rewind button. In each case he had to rework

something that he discovered was not perfect. He talked about doing
it on Toy Story, when the character of Woody had evolved into being

374

Walter Isaacson

a jerk, and on a couple of occasions with the original Macintosh. "If
something isn't right, you can't justignore it and say you'll fix it later,"
he said. "That's what othercompanies do."
When the revised prototype was finally completed in January
2001, Jobs allowed the board to see it for the first time. He explained
the theories behind the design bysketching on a whiteboard; then he
loaded board members into a van for the two-mile trip. When they
saw what Jobs and Johnson had built, they unanimously approved
going ahead. It would, theboard agreed, take the relationship between
retailing and brand image to a newlevel. It wouldalso ensure that con

sumers did not see Apple computers as merely a commodity product
like Dell or Compaq.

Mostoutside experts disagreed. "Maybe it'stime SteveJobs stopped
thinking quite so differently," Business Week wrote in a story headlined
"Sorry Steve, Here's Why Apple Stores Won't Work." Apple's former
chieffinancial officer, Joseph Graziano, was quoted as saying, "Apple's
problem is it stillbelieves the way to grow is serving caviar in a world
that seems pretty content with cheese and crackers." And the retail

consultant David Goldstein declared, "I give them two years before
they're turning out the lights on a very painful andexpensive mistake."

Wood, Stone, Steel, Glass

On May 19, 2001, the first Apple store opened in Tyson's Corner,
Virginia, with gleaming white counters, bleached wood floors, and a

huge "ThinkDifferent" poster ofJohn and Yoko in bed. The skeptics
were wrong. Gateway stores had been averaging 250 visitors a week.
By 2004 Apple stores were averaging 5,400 per week. That year the
stores had $1.2 billion in revenue, setting a record in the retail indus
try for reaching the billion-dollar milestone. Sales in each store were
tabulated every four minutes byEllison's software, giving instant infor
mation on how to integratemanufacturing, supply, and sales channels.
As the stores flourished, Jobs stayed involved in every aspect. Lee
Clow recalled, "In one of our marketing meetings just as the stores
were opening, Steve made us spend a half hour deciding what hue of

Apple Stores

375

gray the restroom signs should be." The architectural firm of Bohlin
Cywinski Jackson designed the signature stores, butJobs made all of
the major decisions.

Jobs particularly focused onthestaircases, which echoed theone he
had built at NeXT. When he visited a store asit was beingconstructed,

he invariably suggested changes to the staircase. His name is listed as
the lead inventor on two patent applications on the staircases, one for
the see-through look that features all-glass treads and glass supports
melded together with titanium, the other for the engineering system
that uses a monolithic unit of glass containing multiple glass sheets
laminated together for supporting loads.
In 1985, ashe was being ousted from hisfirst tour at Apple, he had
visited Italyand been impressed by the gray stone of Florence's side
walks. In 2002, when he came to the conclusion that the light wood
floors in the stores were beginning to look somewhat pedestrian—
a concern that it's hard to imagine bedeviling someone like Microsoft
CEO Steve Ballmer—Jobs wanted to use that stone instead. Some of
his colleagues pushed to replicate the color and texture usingconcrete,
whichwould have been ten times cheaper, butJobsinsisted that it had
to be authentic. The gray-blue Pietra Serena sandstone, which has a
fine-grained texture, comes from a family-owned quarry, II Casone,
in Firenzuola outside of Florence. "We select only 3% of what comes
out of the mountain,because it has to have the right shading and veining and purity," said Johnson. "Steve felt very strongly that we had to
get the color right and it had to be a material with high integrity." So
designers in Florence picked outjust the right quarried stone, oversaw
cutting it into the proper tiles, and made sure each tile was marked
with a sticker to ensure that it was laid out next to its companion tiles.
"Knowing that it's the same stone that Florence uses for its sidewalks
assures you that it can stand the test of time,"saidJohnson.
Another notable feature of the stores was the Genius Bar. Johnson

came up with the idea on a two-day retreat with his team. He had
asked them all to describe the best service they'd everenjoyed. Almost
everyone mentioned some nice experience at a Four Seasons or RitzCarlton hotel. SoJohnson sent his firstfive store managers through the
Ritz-Carlton training program and came up with the idea of replicat-

376

Walter Isaacson

ing something between a concierge deskand a bar. "What if we staffed
the barwith the smartest Macpeople," he said toJobs. "We could call
it the Genius Bar."

Jobs called the idea crazy. He even objected to the name. "You
can't call them geniuses," he said. "They're geeks. They don't have the
people skills to deliver on something called the genius bar." Johnson
thought hehad lost, butthenext day heran into Apple's general coun
sel, who said, "By the way, Steve just told me to trademark the name
genius bar.'"

Many of Jobs's passions came together for Manhattan's Fifth

Avenue store, which opened in2006: acube, asignature staircase, glass,
and making a maximum statement through minimalism. "It was re
ally Steve's store," said Johnson. Open 24/7, it vindicated the strategy
of finding signature high-traffic locations by attracting fifty thou
sand visitors a week during its first year. (Remember Gateway's draw:
250 visitors aweek.) "This store grosses more per square foot than any
store in the world," Jobs proudly noted in 2010. "It also grosses more
in total—absolute dollars, notjustper square foot—than any store in
NewYork. That includes Saks andBloomingdale's."
Jobs was able to drum up excitement for store openings with the
same flair he used for product releases. People began to travel to store
openings andspend the nightoutside so they could be among the first
in. "My then 14-year-old son suggested my first overnighter at Palo
Alto, andthe experience turned into aninteresting social event," wrote
Gary Allen, who started a website that caters to Apple store fans. "He
andI have done several overnighters, including five in othercountries,
and have met so many great people."
In July 2011, a decade after the first ones opened, there were
326 Apple stores. The biggest was in London's Covent Garden, the
tallest in Tokyo's Ginza. The average annual revenue per store was
$34 million, and the total net sales in fiscal 2010 were $9.8 billion.

But the stores did even more. Theydirecdy accounted for only 15% of
Apple's revenue, but by creating buzz andbrand awareness theyindi
rectly helpedboost everything the company did.
Even as he was fighting the effects of cancer in 2011, Jobs spent
time envisioning future store projects, such as the one he wanted to

Apple Stores

377

build in New York City's Grand Central Terminal. One afternoon he
showed me a picture of the Fifth Avenue store and pointed to the
eighteen pieces ofglass on each side. "This was state ofthe art inglass
technology at the time," he said. "We had to build our own autoclaves
to make the glass." Then he pulled out a drawing in which the eigh
teen panes were replaced by four huge panes. That is what he wanted
to do next, he said. Once again, it was a challenge at the intersection
of aesthetics and technology. "If we wanted to do it with our current

technology, we would have to make the cube a foot shorter," he said.
"And I didn't want to do that. So we have to build some new autoclaves
in China."

Ron Johnson was not thrilled bythe idea. He thought the eighteen
panes actually looked better than four panes would. "The proportions
we have today work magically with the colonnade of the GM Build
ing," he said. "Itglitters like ajewel box. I think ifwe get the glass too
transparent, it will almost go away to a fault." He debated the point
with Jobs, but to no avail. "When technology enables something new,
hewants to take advantage ofthat," said Johnson. "Plus, for Steve, less
is always more, simpler is always better. Therefore, if you can build a
glass box with fewer elements, it's better, it's simpler, and it's at the
forefront of technology. That's where Steve likes to be, in both his
products and his stores."

CHAPTER

THIRTY

THE DIGITAL HUB
From iTunes to the iPod

The original iPody 2001

Connecting the Dots
Once a year Jobs took his most valuable employees on a retreat, which
he called "The Top 100." They were picked based on a simple guide
line: the people you would bring ifyou could take only ahundred peo
ple with you on a lifeboat to your next company. At the end of each
retreat, Jobs would stand in front of a whiteboard (he loved white

boards because they gave him complete control ofa situation and they
engendered focus) and ask, "What are the ten things we should be
doing next?" People would fight to get their suggestions on the list.
378

The Digital Hub

379

Jobs would write them down, and then cross offthe ones he decreed
dumb. After much jockeying, the group would come up with a Hst of
ten.Then Jobs would slash the bottom seven and announce, "We can
only do three."

By 2001 Apple had revived its personal computer offerings. It was
now timeto thinkdifferent. A setofnew possibilities topped thewhatnext list on his whiteboard that year.

At the time, a pall had descended on the digital realm. The dot
com bubble had burst, and the NASDAQ^had fallen more than

50% from its peak. Only three tech companies had ads during the
January 2001 Super Bowl, compared to seventeen the year before. But
the sense of deflation went deeper. For the twenty-five years since Jobs
and Wozniak had founded Apple, the personal computer had been
the centerpiece of the digital revolution. Now experts were predict
ing that its central role was ending. It had "matured into something
boring," wrote the Wall StreetJournals Walt Mossberg. JeffWeitzen,
the CEO of Gateway, proclaimed, "We're clearly migrating away from
the PC as the centerpiece."
It was at that moment that Jobs launched a new grand strategy

that would transform Apple—and with it the entire technology in
dustry. The personal computer, instead ofedging toward the sidelines,
would become a "digital hub" that coordinated a variety of devices,
from music players to video recorders to cameras. You'd linkand sync
allthesedevices with your computer, and it would manage yourmusic,
pictures, video, text, and all aspects ofwhat Jobs dubbed your "digital

lifestyle." Apple would no longer be just acomputer company—indeed
it would drop that word from its name—but the Macintosh would
be reinvigorated bybecoming the hub for an astounding array of new
gadgets, including the iPod andiPhone and iPad.
When he was turning thirty, Jobs had used a metaphor about rec
ord albums. He was musing about why folks over thirty develop rigid
thought patterns and tend to be less innovative. "People get stuck in
those patterns, justlike grooves in a record, and they never get out of
them," he said. At age forty-five, Jobs was now about to get out of his
groove.

380

Walter Isaacson

Fire Wire

Jobs s vision thatyour computer could become your digital hub went
back to a technology called FireWire, which Apple developed in the
early 1990s. It was ahigh-speed serial port thatmoved digital files such
as video from one device to another. Japanese camcorder makers ad
opted it, and Jobs decided to include it on the updated versions of the
iMac that came outin October 1999. He began to see that FireWire
could be part of a system that moved video from cameras onto a com
puter, where it could be edited and distributed.

To make this work, the iMac needed to have great video editing
software. So Jobs went to his old friends atAdobe, the digital graph
ics company, and asked them to make a new Mac version of Adobe

Premiere, which was popular onWindows computers. Adobe's execu

tives stunned Jobs by flatly turning him down. The Macintosh, they
said, had too few users to make it worthwhile. Jobs was furious and
felt betrayed. "IputAdobe onthe map, and they screwed me," helater
claimed. Adobe made matters even worse when it also didn't write its

other popular programs, such as Photoshop, for the Mac OSX, even
though theMacintosh was popular among designers and other creative
people who used those applications.

Jobs never forgave Adobe, and a decade later he got into a public
war with the company by not permitting Adobe Flash to run on the
iPad.He took away a valuable lesson that reinforced his desire for end-

to-end control of all key elements of a system: "My primary insight
when we were screwed by Adobe in 1999 was that we shouldn't get
into any business where we didn't control both the hardware and the

software, otherwise we'd get ourhead handed to us."

So starting in 1999 Apple began to produce application software
forthe Mac, witha focus on people at the intersection of art andtech
nology. These included Final CutPro, for editing digital video; iMovie,
which was a simpler consumer version; iDVD, for burning video or
music onto a disc; iPhoto, to compete with Adobe Photoshop; GarageBand, for creating and mixing music; iTunes, for managing your songs;
and the iTunes Store, forbuying songs.

The Digital Hub

381

The idea of the digital hub quickly came into focus. "I first under
stood this with the camcorder," Jobs said. "Using iMovie makes your
camcorder ten times more valuable." Instead of having hundreds of

hours of raw footage you would never really sit through, you could
editit on your computer, make elegant dissolves, add music, and roll
credits, listing yourself as executive producer. It allowed people to be
creative, to express themselves, to make something emotional. "That's
when it hit me that the personal computer was going to morph into
something else."

Jobs had another insight: If the computer served as the hub, it
would allow the portable devices to become simpler. A lot ofthe func
tions that the devices tried to do, such as editing the video or pictures,

they did poorly because they had small screens and could not easily
accommodate menus filled with lots of functions. Computers could
handle that more easily.
And one more thing... What Jobs also saw was that this worked
best when everything—the device, computer, software, applications,
FireWire—was all tightly integrated. "I became even more of a be
liever in providing end-to-end solutions," he recalled.
The beauty of this realization was that there was only one com

pany thatwas well-positioned to provide such anintegrated approach.
Microsoft wrote software, Dell and Compaq made hardware, Sony
produced a lot ofdigital devices, Adobe developed a lot ofapplications.
But only Apple did all of these things. "We're the only company that
owns the whole widget—the hardware, the software and the operating

system," he explained to Time. "We can take full responsibility for the
user experience. We can do things that the other guys can't do."
Apple's first integrated foray into thedigital hub strategy was video.
With FireWire, you could get your video onto your Mac, and with
iMovie you could edit it into a masterpiece. Then what? You'd want
to burn some DVDs so you andyour friends could watch it on a TV.
"So we spent a lot of time working with the drive manufacturers to
get a consumer drive that could burn a DVD," he said. "Wewere the
first to ever ship that." As usual Jobs focused on making the product
as simple as possible for the user, and this was the key to its success.
Mike Evangelist, who worked at Apple on software design, recalled

382

Walter Isaacson

demonstrating to Jobs an early version ofthe interface. After looking
at a bunch ofscreenshots, Jobs jumped up, grabbed a marker, anddrew
a simple rectangle on a whiteboard. "Here's the new application," he
said. "It's gotone window. You drag your video intothewindow. Then

you click the button that says 'Burn.'That's it. That's what we're going
to make." Evangelist was dumbfounded, but it led to the simplicity of
what became iDVD. Jobs even helped design the"Burn" button icon.

Jobs knew digital photography was also about to explode, so Apple
developed ways to make the computer the hub ofyour photos. But for
the first year at least, he took his eye off one really big opportunity.
HP and a few others were producing a drive that burned music CDs,
butJobs decreed that Apple should focus on video rather than music.

In addition, his angry insistence that the iMac get rid ofits tray disk
drive and use instead a more elegant slot drive meant that it could
not include the first CD burners, which were initially made for the
tray format. "We kind of missed the boat on that," he recalled. "So we
needed to catch up realfast."

The mark ofan innovative company is not only that it comes up
with new ideas first, but also that it knows how to leapfrog when it
finds itself behind.

iTunes

It didn't take Jobs long to realize that music was going to be huge.
By 2000 people were ripping music onto their computers from CDs,
or downloading it from file-sharing services such as Napster, and
burning playlists onto their own blank disks. That year the number
of blank CDs sold in the United States was 320 million. There were

only 281 million people in the country. That meant some people
were really into burning CDs, and Apple wasn't catering to them. "I
felt like a dope," he toldFortune. "I thought we had missed it.We had
to work hard to catchup."
Jobs added a CD burner to the iMac, but that wasn't enough. His
goal was to make it simple to transfer music from a CD,manage it on
your computer, and thenburn playlists. Othercompanies were already

The Digital Hub

383

making music-management applications, but they were clunky and
complex. One ofJobs's talents was spotting markets that were filled
with second-rate products. He looked at the music apps that were
available—including Real Jukebox, Windows Media Player, and one
that HP was including withitsCD burner—and came to a conclusion:
"They were so complicated that only a genius could figure out halfof
their features."

That is when Bill Kincaid came in. A former Apple software engi
neer, he was driving to a track in Willows, California, to race his For
mula Ford sports car while (abit incongruously) listening to National
Public Radio. He heard a report about a portable music player called
the Rio that played a digital song format called MP3. He perked up
when the reporter said something like, "Don't get excited, Mac users,
because it won't work with Macs." Kincaid said to himself, "Ha! I can
fix that!"

To help himwrite a Rio manager for the Mac, he called his friends
Jeff Robbin and Dave Heller, also former Apple software engineers.

Their product, known as Soundjam, offered Mac users an interface
for the Rio and software for managing the songs on their computer.

InJuly 2000, when Jobs was pushing his team to come upwithmusicmanagement software, Apple swooped in and bought Soundjam,
bringing its founders back into the Apple fold. (All three stayed with
the company, and Robbin continued to run the music software devel
opment team for the next decade. Jobs considered Robbin so valuable
he once allowed a Time reporter to meethim onlyafter extracting the
promise that the reporter would not printhis last name.)
Jobs personally worked with them to transform Soundjam into an
Apple product. It was laden with all sorts offeatures, andconsequently
a lot of complex screens. Jobs pushed them to make it simpler and
more fun. Instead of an interface that made you specifywhether you

were searching for an artist, song, or album, Jobs insisted on a simple
box where you could type in anything you wanted. From iMovie the
team adopted the sleek brushed-metal look and also a name. They
dubbed it iTunes.

Jobs unveiled iTunes at the January2001 Macworld as part of the
digital hub strategy. It would be free to allMac users, he announced.

384

Walter Isaacson

"Join the music revolution with iTunes, and make your music de
vices ten times more valuable," he concluded to great applause. As his
advertising slogan would later putit: Rip. Mix. Burn.
That afternoon Jobs happened to be meeting with John Markoff
ofthe New York Times. The interview was going badly, but at the end
Jobs sat down at his Mac and showed off iTunes. "It reminds me of

my youth," he said as the psychedelic patterns danced on the screen.

That led him to reminisce about dropping acid. Taking LSD was one
of the two or three most important things he'd done in his life, Jobs
told Markoff. People who had never taken acid would never fully un
derstand him.

The iPod

The next step for the digital hub strategy was tomake aportable music
player. Jobs realized that Apple had the opportunity to design such
a device in tandem with the iTunes software, allowing it to be sim
pler. Complex tasks could be handled on the computer, easy ones on
the device. Thus was born the iPod, the device thatwould begin the
transformation of Apple from being a computer maker into being
the world's most valuable company.
Jobs had a special passion for the project because he loved music.
The music players that were already on the market, he told his col
leagues, "truly sucked." Phil Schiller, Jon Rubinstein, and the rest

of the team agreed. As they were building iTunes, they spent time
with the Rio and other players while merrily trashing them. "We
would sit around and say, These things really stink,'" Schiller re
called. "They held about sixteen songs, and you couldn't figure out
how to use them."

Jobs began pushing for a portable music player in the fall of 2000,
but Rubinstein responded that the necessary components were not
available yet. He askedJobs to wait.After a fewmonths Rubinsteinwas

able to score a suitable small LCD screen and rechargeable lithiumpolymer battery. The tougher challenge was finding a disk drive that

The DigitalHub

385

was small enough buthad ample memory to make agreat music player.
Then, in February 2001, he took one of his regular trips to Japan to
visit Apple's suppliers.
At the end of a routine meeting with Toshiba, the engineers men

tioned a new product they had in the lab that would be ready by that
June. It was a tiny, 1.8-inch drive (the size ofa silver dollar) thatwould
hold five gigabytes of storage (about a thousand songs), and theywere
not surewhat to do with it. When the Toshiba engineers showed it to
Rubinstein, he knew immediately what it could be used for. A thou
sand songs in his pocket! Perfect. But he kept a poker face. Jobs was

also in Japan, giving the keynote speech at theTokyo Macworld con
ference. They met that nightat the HotelOkura, where Jobs was stay
ing. "I know how to do it now," Rubinstein told him. "All I need is
a $10 million check." Jobs immediately authorized it. So Rubinstein

started negotiating with Toshiba to have exclusive rights to every one
of the disks it could make, and he began to look around for someone
who could lead the development team.

Tony Fadell was a brash entrepreneurial programmer with a cyber
punk look and an engaging smile who had started three companies
while still at the University of Michigan. He had gone to workat the
handheld device maker General Magic (where he met Apple refugees

Andy Hertzfeld and Bill Atkinson), and then spent some awkward
time at Philips Electronics, where he bucked the staidculture with his
short bleached hair and rebellious style. He had come up with some
ideas for creating a betterdigital music player, which he had shopped
around unsuccessfully to RealNetworks, Sony, and Philips. One dayhe
was in Colorado, skiing with an uncle, and his cell phone rang while
he was riding on the chairlift. It was Rubinstein, who told him that
Apple was looking for someone who could workon a "small electronic
device." Fadell, not lacking in confidence, boastedthat he was a wizard
at making such devices. Rubinstein invited him to Cupertino.
Fadell assumed that he was beinghired to work on a personal digi
tal assistant, some successor to the Newton. But when he met with

Rubinstein, the topic quickly turned to iTunes, which had beenout for
three months. "We've been trying to hookup the existing MP3 players

386

Walter Isaacson

to iTunes and they've been horrible, absolutely horrible," Rubinstein
told him. "We think we should make our own version."

Fadell was thrilled. "I was passionate about music. I was trying to
do some ofthat at RealNetworks, and I was pitching an MP3 player
to Palm." He agreed to come aboard, at least as a consultant. After a
fewweeks Rubinstein insisted that if he was to lead the team, he had
to become a full-time Apple employee. But Fadell resisted; he likedhis
freedom. Rubinstein was furious at what he considered Fadell's whin

ing. "This is one of those life decisions," he told Fadell. "You'll never
regret it."

He decided to force Fadell's hand. He gathered a roomful of the
twenty or so people who had been assigned to the project. When
Fadell walked in, Rubinstein told him, "Tony, we're not doing this
project unless you sign on full-time. Are you in or out? You have to
decide right now."

Fadell looked Rubinstein in the eye, then turned to the audience

and said, "Does this always happen at Apple, that people are put
under duress to sign anoffer?" He paused for a moment, said yes, and
grudgingly shook Rubinstein's hand. "Itleft some very unsettling feel
ing between Jon and me for many years," Fadell recalled. Rubinstein
agreed: "I don'tthink he ever forgave me for that."
Fadell and Rubinstein were fated toclash because they boththought
that they had fathered the iPod. As Rubinstein saw it, he had been
given the mission byJobs monthsearlier, found the Toshibadisk drive,
and figured out the screen, battery, and other key elements. He had
then brought in Fadell to put it together. He and others who resented
Fadell's visibility began to refer to him as "Tony Baloney." But from

Fadell's perspective, before he came to Apple he had already come up
withplans for a great MP3 player, andhe hadbeen shopping it around
to othercompanies before he had agreed to come to Apple. The issue
of who deserved the most credit for the iPod, or should get the title
Podfather, would be fought over the years in interviews, articles, web
pages, and even Wikipedia entries.
But for the next few months they were too busy to bicker. Jobs
wanted the iPod out by Christmas, and this meant having it ready to
unveil in October. They looked around for other companies that were

The DigitalHub

387

designing MP3 players that could serve as the foundation for Apple's
work and settled on a small company named PortalPlayer. Fadell told
the team there, "This is the project that's going to remold Apple, and
ten years from now, it's going to be a music business, not a computer
business." He convinced them to sign an exclusive deal, and his group
began to modify PortalPlayer's deficiencies, such as its complex inter
faces, shortbatterylife, and inability to make a playlist longer than ten
songs.

That's It!

There are certain meetings that are memorable both because they
mark a historic moment and because they illuminate the way a leader
operates. Such was the case with the gathering in Apple's fourth-floor
conference room in April 2001, where Jobs decided on the fundamen
tals of the iPod. There to hearFadell present his proposals to Jobswere
Rubinstein, Schiller, Ive, Jeff Robbin, and marketing director Stan
Ng. Fadell didn't know Jobs, and he was understandably intimidated.
"When he walked into the conference room, I sat up and thought,
'Whoa, there's Steve!' I was really on guard, because I'd heard how
brutal he could be."

The meeting started with a presentation of the potential market
and what other companies were doing. Jobs, as usual, had no patience.
"Hewon't pay attention to a slide deck for more thana minute," Fadell
said. When a slide showed other possible players in the market, he
waved it away. "Don't worry about Sony," he said. "We know what
we're doing, and they don't." After that, they quit showing slides, and
insteadJobs peppered the group with questions. Fadell took away a
lesson: "Steve prefers to be in the moment, talkingthings through. He
once told me,If you need slides, it shows you don't knowwhat you're
talking about.'"
InsteadJobs liked to be shown physical objects that he could feel,

inspect, and fondle. So Fadell brought three different models to the
conference room; Rubinstein had coached him on how to reveal them

sequentially so that his preferred choice would be the piece de resis-

388

Walter Isaacson

tance. Theyhidthe mockup ofthatoption under awooden bowl at the
center of the table.

Fadell began his show-and-tell by taking the various parts they
were using out of a box and spreading them on the table. There were
the 1.8-inch drive, LCD screen, boards, and batteries, all labeled with
their cost and weight. As he displayed them, they discussed how the
prices or sizes might come down over the next year or so. Some of

thepieces could beputtogether, like Lego blocks, to show theoptions.
Then Fadell began unveiling his models, which were made of
Styrofoam with fishing leads inserted togive them the proper weight.
The first had a slot for a removable memory card for music. Jobs dis
missed it as complicated. The second had dynamic RAM memory,
which was cheap butwould lose all ofthe songs if the battery ran out.
Jobs was not pleased. Next Fadell put a few of the pieces together to
show what a device with the 1.8-inch hard drive would be like. Jobs
seemed intrigued. The show climaxed with Fadell lifting thebowl and
revealing a fully assembled model ofthatalternative. "I was hoping to
be able to play more with the Lego parts, but Steve settled right on
the hard-drive option just the way wehad modeled it,"Fadell recalled.
He was rather stunned by the process. "Iwas used to being at Philips,
where decisions like this would take meeting after meeting, with a lot
ofPowerPoint presentations and going back for more study."
Next it was Phil Schiller's turn. "Can I bring out my idea now?" he
asked. He left the room and returned with a handful of iPod models,
all of which had the same device on the front: the soon-to-be-famous

trackwheel. "I had been thinking of how you go through a playlist,"
he recalled. "You can't press a button hundreds of times. Wouldn't it

be great if you could have a wheel?" By turning the wheel with your
thumb, you could scroll through songs. The longer you kept turning,
the faster the scrolling got, so you could zip through hundreds easily.
Jobs shouted, "That's it!" He got Fadell and the engineers working
on it.

Once the project was launched, Jobs immersed himself in it daily.
His main demandwas "Simplify!" He would go over eachscreen of the
user interface and apply a rigid test: If he wanted a song or a function,
he should be able to get there in three clicks. And the click should be

The DigitalHub

389

intuitive. If he couldn't figure out how to navigate to something, or if it
took more than three clicks, he would be brutal. "There would be times

whenwe'd rackour brains on a user interface problem, and think we'd
considered every option, and he would go, 'Did you think of this?'"
said Fadell. "And then we'd all go,'Holy shit.' He'd redefine the prob
lem or approach, and ourlittle problem would go away."
Every nightJobs would be on the phone withideas. Fadell and the
others would call each other up, discuss Jobs's latest suggestion, and
conspire on howto nudge himto where they wanted him to go, which
worked about half the time. "We would have this swirling thing of
Steve's latest idea, and wewould alltry to stayahead of it," said Fadell.
"Every day there was something like that,whether it was a switch here,
or a button color, or a pricing strategy issue. With his style, youneeded
to workwith your peers, watch each other's back."
One key insight Jobs had was that as many functions as possible
should be performed using iTunes on your computer rather than on
the iPod. As he later recalled:

In order to make the iPod really easy to use—and this took a lot of
arguing on my part—we needed to limit what the device itselfwould
do. Instead we put that functionality in iTunes on the computer. For
example, wemade it soyou couldn't make playlists using the device. You
made playlists on iTunes, andthenyou synced withthe device. That was
controversial. But what made the Rio and other devices so brain-dead

was that they werecomplicated. They had to do things like make play
lists, because they weren't integrated with the jukebox software on your
computer. So by owning the iTunes software and the iPod device, that
allowed us to make the computer and the device work together, and it
allowed us to put the complexity in the right place.

The most Zen of all simplicities was Jobs's decree, which aston
ished his colleagues, that the iPod would not have an on-off switch. It
became true of mostApple devices. Therewas no needfor one.Apple's
devices would go dormant if they were not being used, and they would
wake up when youtouched anykey. But therewas no needfor a switch
that would go "Click—you're off.Good-bye."

390

Walter Isaacson

Suddenly everything had fallen into place: a drive that would hold

a thousand songs; an interface and scroll wheel that would let you
navigate a thousand songs; a FireWire connection that could sync a
thousand songs in under ten minutes; and a battery that would last
through a thousand songs. "We suddenly were looking at one another
and saying, This is goingto be so cool,' "Jobs recalled. "We knewhow

cool it was, because we knew how badly we each wanted one person
ally. And the concept became so beautifully simple: a thousand songs
in your pocket." One of the copywriters suggested theycall it a "Pod."
Jobs was the one who, borrowing from the iMac and iTunes names,
modified that to iPod.

The Whiteness ofthe Whale
Jony Ive had been playing with thefoam model oftheiPod and trying
to conceive what the finished product should look like when an idea
occurred to him on a morning drive from his San Francisco home to

Cupertino. Its face should be pure white, he told his colleague in the
car, and it should connect seamlessly to a polished stainless steel back.
"Most small consumer products have this disposable feel to them," said
Ive. "There is no cultural gravity to them. The thing I'm proudest of
about the iPod is that there is something about it that makes it feel
significant, not disposable."

The white would be notjustwhite, butpure white. "Not only the
device, but the headphones and the wires and even the power block,"
he recalled. "Pure white." Others kept arguing that the headphones, of
course, should be black, like all headphones. "But Steve got it imme
diately, and embraced white," said Ive. "There would be a purity to it."
The sinuous flow of the white earbud wires helped make the iPod an
icon. As Ive described it:

There was something very significant and nondisposable about it, yet
there was also something very quiet andvery restrained. It wasn't wag
ging its tail in your face. It was restrained, but it was also crazy, with
those flowing headphones. That's whyI like white. White isn'tjust a

The DigitalHub

391

neutral color. It is so pure and quiet. Bold and conspicuous and yet so
inconspicuous aswell.

LeeClow's advertising team atTBWA\Chiat\Day wanted to celebrate
the iconic nature of the iPod and its whiteness rather than create more

traditional product-introduction ads that showed offthe device's fea
tures. James Vincent, a lanky young Britwho hadplayed in a band and
worked as a DJ, had recently joined the agency, and he was a natural
to help focus Apple's advertising on hip millennial-generation music
lovers rather than rebelbabyboomers. With the help of the art director
Susan Alinsangan, they created a series of billboards and posters for
the iPod, and they spread the options onJobs's conference room table
for his1 inspection.
At the farrightendtheyplaced the most traditional options, which
featured straightforward photos of the iPod on a white background.
At the farleft end theyplaced the most graphic and iconic treatments,
which showed just a silhouette of someone dancing while listen
ing to an iPod, its white earphone wires waving with the music. "It
understood your emotional and intensely personal relationship with
the music," Vincentsaid. He suggested to Duncan Milner,the creative
director, that theyallstand firmly at thefar leftend, to see if theycould
getJobs to gravitate there. When hewalked in,hewentimmediately to
the right, looking at the stark product pictures. "This looks great," he
said."Let's talk about these."Vincent,Milner, and Clow did not budge
from the other end. Finally, Jobs looked up, glanced at the iconictreat
ments, and said, "Oh, I guess you like this stuff." He shook his head.
"It doesn't show the product. It doesn't say what it is." Vincent pro
posed that theyuse the iconic images but addthe tagline, "1,000 songs
in your pocket." That would say it all. Jobs glanced back toward the
right end of the table, then finally agreed. Not surprisingly he wassoon
claiming that it was his idea to push for the more iconic ads. "There
were some skeptics aroundwho asked, Bows this goingto actually sell
an iPod?'"Jobs recalled. "That's when it camein handy to be the CEO,
so I could push the idea through."
Jobs realized that there was yet another advantage to the fact that
Apple had an integrated system of computer, software, and device. It

392

Walter Isaacson

meant that sales of the iPod would drive sales of the iMac. That, in

turn, meant that he could take money that Apple was spending on
iMac advertising and shift it to spending on iPod ads—getting a dou
ble bang for the buck. A triple bang, actually, because the ads would
lend luster and youthfulness to the whole Apple brand. He recalled:
I had this crazy idea thatwe could sell justas many Macs byadvertis
ing the iPod. In addition, the iPod would position Apple as evoking
innovation andyouth. SoI moved $75 million of advertising money to
the iPod, even though the category didn't justify one hundredth of that.
Thatmeant that we completely dominated the market for music players.
We outspenteverybody by a factor of abouta hundred.

The television ads showed the iconic silhouettes dancing to songs
picked byJobs, Clow, and Vincent. "Finding the music became our
main fun at our weekly marketing meetings," said Clow. "We'd play
some edgy cut, Steve would say, 'I hate that,' and James would have
to talkhim into it."The ads helped popularize many new bands, most
notably the Black Eyed Peas; the adwith"Hey Mama" is the classic of
the silhouettes genre. Whena new adwas about to gointoproduction,
Jobs would often have second thoughts, call up Vincent, andinsist that
he cancel it."It sounds a bit poppy" or"It sounds a bit trivial," he would
say. "Let's call it off." James would get flustered and try to talk him
around. "Hold on, it's going to be great," he would argue. Invariably
Jobs would relent, the ad would be made, and he would love it.

Jobs unveiled the iPod on October 23, 2001, at one of his signature
product launch events. "Hint: It's not a Mac," the invitation teased.

When it came time to reveal the product, after he described its tech
nical capabilities, Jobs did not do his usual trick of walking over to a
table andpulling offa velvet cloth. Instead he said, "I happen to have
oneright here in mypocket." He reached into hisjeans and pulled out
the gleaming white device. "This amazing little device holds a thou
sand songs, and it goes right in mypocket." He slipped it backin and
ambled offstage to applause.
Initially there was some skepticism among tech geeks, especially

TheDigital Hub

393

about the $399 price. In the blogosphere, the joke was that iPod stood
for "idiots price our devices." However, consumers soon made it a hit.
More than that, the iPod becamethe essence of everythingApple was
destined to be: poetry connected to engineering, arts and creativity in
tersecting with technology, design that's bold and simple. It had an
ease of use that came from being an integrated end-to-end system,
from computer to FireWire to device to software to content manage
ment. When you took an iPod out of the box,it was so beautiful that it
seemed to glow, and it made all other musicplayers look as if they had
been designed and manufactured in Uzbekistan.
Not since the original Mac had a clarityof product vision so pro
pelled a companyinto the future."If anybody was everwondering why
Apple is on the earth, I would hold up this as a good example," Jobs
told NewsweeHs Steve Levy at the time. Wozniak, who had long been
skeptical of integrated systems, began to revise his philosophy. "Wow,
it makes sense that Apple was the one to come up with it," Wozniak
enthused after the iPod came out. "After all, Apple's whole history is
making both the hardware and the software, with the result that the
two work better together."
The daythat Levy got his press preview of the iPod, he happened
to be meeting Bill Gates at a dinner, and he showed it to him. "Have
you seen this yet?" Levy asked. Levy noted, "Gates went into a zone
that recalls those science fiction films where a space alien, confronted
with a novel object, creates some sort of force tunnel between him
and the object, allowing him to suckdirectly into his brain all possible
information about it." Gates played with the scroll wheel and pushed
every button combination, while his eyes stared fixedly at the screen.
"It looks like a great product," he finally said. Then he paused and
looked puzzled."It's only for Macintosh?" he asked.

CHAPTER

THIRTY-ONE

THE iTUNES STORE
I'm the Pied Piper

Warner Music

At the beginning of 2002 Apple faced a challenge. The seamless con
nection between your iPod, iTunes software, and computer made it
easy to manage the music you already owned. But to get new music,
you had to venture out of this cozyenvironment and go buy a CD or
download the songs online. The latter endeavor usually meant foray
ing into the murky domains of file-sharing and piracy services. SoJobs
wanted to offer iPod users a wayto download songs that was simple,
safe, and legal.
The music industry also faced a challenge. It was being plagued
by a bestiaryof piracyservices—Napster, Grokster, Gnutella, Kazaa—
that enabled peopleto get songs for free. Partlyas a result, legalsales of
CDs were down 9% in 2002.

The executives at the music companies were desperately scram
bling, with the elegance of second-graders playing soccer, to agree on
a common standard for copy-protecting digital music. Paul Vidich
of Warner Music and his corporate colleague Bill Raduchel of AOL
Time Warner were working with Sonyin that effort, and they hoped

394

The iTunes Store

395

to get Apple to be part of their consortium. So a group of them flew to
Cupertino in January 2002 to seeJobs.
It was not an easy meeting. Vidich had a cold and was losing his
voice, so his deputy, Kevin Gage, began the presentation. Jobs, sitting
at the headof the conference table, fidgeted andlooked annoyed. After
four slides, he waved his hand and broke in. "You have your heads up
your asses," he pointed out. Everyone turned to Vidich,who struggled
to get his voice working. "You're right," he said after a long pause. "We
don't know what to do. You need to help us figure it out." Jobs later
recalled being slightly taken aback, and he agreed that Apple would
work with the Warner-Sony effort.
If the music companies had been able to agree on a standardized
encoding method for protecting music files, then multiple online stores
could haveproliferated. That would have made it hard forJobs to cre
ate an iTunes Store that allowed Apple to control how online sales
were handled. Sony, however, handed Jobs that opportunity when
it decided, after the January 2002 Cupertino meeting, to pull out of
the talks because it favored its own proprietary format, from which it
would get royalties.
"You know Steve, he has his own agenda," Sony's CEO Nobuyuki
Idei explained to Red Herring editor Tony Perkins. "Although he is a
genius, he doesn't share everything with you. This is a difficult person
to work with if you are a big company.... It is a nightmare." Howard
Stringer, then head of SonyNorth America, added aboutJobs: "Try
ing to get together would frankly be a waste of time."
Instead Sony joined with Universal to create a subscription ser
vice called Pressplay. Meanwhile, AOL Time Warner, Bertelsmann,
and EMI teamed up with RealNetworks to create MusicNet. Nei
ther would license its songs to the rival service, so each offered only
about half the music available. Both were subscription services that
allowed customers to stream songs but not keep them, so you lost

access to them if your subscription lapsed. They had complicated
restrictions and clunky interfaces. Indeed they would earn the dubi
ous distinction of becoming number nine on PC World's list of "the
25 worst tech products of all time."The magazine declared,"The ser-

396

Walter Isaacson

vices' stunningly brain-dead features showed that the record compa
nies still didn't get it."

At this point Jobs could have decided simply to indulge piracy. Free
music meant more valuable iPods. Yet because he really liked music,
and the artists who made it, he was opposed to what he sawas the theft
of creative products.As he later told me:
Fromthe earliest days at Apple, I realized that we thrivedwhen we cre
ated intellectual property. If people copied or stole our software, we'd
be out of business. If it weren't protected, there'd be no incentive for us
to make new software or product designs. If protection of intellectual
property begins to disappear, creative companies willdisappear or never
get started. But there's a simpler reason: It's wrong to steal. It hurts other
people. And it hurts your own character.

He knew, however, that the bestway to stop piracy—in fact the only
way—was to offer an alternative that was more attractive than the

brain-dead services that music companies were concocting. "We be
lieve that 80% of the people stealing stuff don't want to be, there's
just no legal alternative," he toldAndyLanger of Esquire. "So we said,
'Let'screate a legal alternative to this.' Everybody wins. Music compa
nies win.The artists win. Apple wins. And the userwins, because he
gets a better service and doesn't haveto be a thief."
So Jobs set out to create an "iTunes Store" and to persuade the
five top record companies to allow digital versions of their songs to
be soldthere. "I've never spentso much of mytime trying to convince
people to do the right thing for themselves," he recalled. Because the
companies were worried about the pricing model and unbundling of
albums, Jobs pitched that his new service wouldbe only on the Mac
intosh, a mere 5% of the market. They could try the idea with little
risk. "We usedour smallmarketshare to our advantage by arguingthat
if the store turned out to be destructive it wouldn't destroy the entire
universe," he recalled.

Jobs's proposal was to selldigital songs for 99 cents—a simple and
impulsive purchase. The record companies would get 70 cents of that.

The iTunes Store

397

Jobs insisted that this would be more appealing than the monthly
subscription model preferred by the music companies. He believed
that people had an emotional connection to the songs they loved.
They wanted to own "Sympathy for the Devil" and "Shelterfrom the
Storm," not just rent them. As he told Jeff Goodell of Rolling Stone
at the time, "I think you could make available the Second Coming in
a subscription model and it might not be successful."
Jobs alsoinsistedthat the iTunes Storewould sellindividual songs,
not just entire albums. That ended up being the biggest cause of con
flict with the record companies, which made money by putting out
albums that had two or three great songs and a dozen or so fillers; to
get the song they wanted, consumers had to buy the whole album.
Some musicians objected on artistic grounds to Jobs's plan to disag
gregate albums. "There's a flow to a good album," said Trent Reznor
of Nine Inch Nails. "The songs support each other.That's the way I
like to make music." But the objections were moot. "Piracy and online
downloads had already deconstructed the album," recalled Jobs. "You
couldn't compete with piracyunless you sold the songs individually."
At the heart of the problemwas a chasm between the people who
loved technology and those who loved artistry. Jobs loved both, as he
had demonstrated at Pixar and Apple, and he was thus positioned to
bridge the gap. He later explained:
When I went to Pixar, I became aware of a great divide. Tech companies
don'tunderstand creativity. They don'tappreciate intuitive thinking,like
the abilityof an A&R guy at a musiclabel to listen to a hundred artists
and have a feel for which five might be successful. And they think that
creative peoplejust sit aroundon couches all day and are undisciplined,
because theyVe not seenhowdriven and disciplined the creative folks at
placeslike Pixarare.On the other hand, musiccompanies are completely
clueless about technology. They think theycanjust go out and hire a few
tech folks. But that would be likeApple tryingto hirepeople to produce
music. Wed get second-rate A&R people, just likethe music companies
ended up with second-rate tech people. Fm one of the few people who
understands howproducing technology requires intuition and creativity,
and how producingsomethingartistic takes realdiscipline.

398

Walter Isaacson

Jobs had a long relationship with Barry Schuler, the CEO of the
AOL unit ofTime Warner, andbegan to pickhis brain about howto
get the music labels into the proposed iTunes Store. "Piracy is flipping
everyone's circuit breakers," Schulertold him. "You should use the ar
gument that because you have an integrated end-to-end service, from
iPods to the store, you can best protecthow the music is used."
One day in March 2002, Schuler got a call fromJobs and decided
to conference-in Vidich. Jobs asked Vidich if he would come to Cu
pertino and bring the head of WarnerMusic, Roger Ames. This time

Jobs was charming. Ames was a sardonic, fun, and clever Brit, a type
(such asJames Vincent andJonyIve) that Jobs tended to like. So the
Good Steve was on display. At one point early in the meeting, Jobs
even played the unusual role of diplomat. Ames and Eddy Cue, who
ran iTunes forApple, gotintoan argument over why radio in England
was not asvibrant as in the United States, andJobs steppedin, saying,
"We know about tech, but we don't know as much about music, so let's
not argue."

Ames had just lost a boardroom battle to have his corporation's
AOL division improve its own fledgling music download service.
"When I did a digital download using AOL, I could never find the
song on my shitty computer," he recalled. So whenJobs demonstrated
a prototype of the iTunes Store, Ameswas impressed. "Yes, yes, that's
exactly what we've been waiting for," he said. He agreed that Warner
Music would sign up, and he offered to help enlist other music com
panies.
Jobs flew east to show the service to other Time Warner execs."He
sat in front of a Mac like a kid with a toy," Vidich recalled. "Unlike
any other CEO, he was totally engagedwith the product." Ames and
Jobs began to hammer out the details of the iTunes Store, including
the number of times a track couldbe put on different devices and how

the copy-protection system wouldwork. They soonwerein agreement
and set out to corral other music labels.

The iTunes Store

399

Herding Cats
The keyplayer to enlistwas DougMorris,headof the Universal Music
Group. His domain included must-have artists such as U2, Eminem,
and Mariah Carey, as well as powerful labels such as Motown and
Interscope-Geffen-A&M. Morris was eager to talk. More than any
other mogul, he was upset about piracy and fed up with the caliber of
the technology people at the music companies. "It was like the Wild
West," Morris recalled. "No one was selling digital music, and it was
awash with piracy. Everythingwe tried at the record companies was a
failure. The difference in skill sets between the music folks and tech

nologists is just huge."
As Ames walked with Jobs to Morris's office on Broadway he
briefed Jobs on what to say. It worked. What impressed Morris was
that Jobs tied everything together in a way that made things easyfor
the consumer and also safefor the record companies. "Steve did some
thing brilliant," said Morris. "He proposed this complete system: the
iTunes Store, the music-management software, the iPod itself. It was
so smooth. He had the whole package."
Morris was convinced that Jobs had the technical vision that was

lacking at the music companies. "Of course we have to rely on Steve
Jobs to do this," he told his own tech vice president,"because we don't
haveanyone at Universal who knows anythingabout technology." That
did not make Universale technologists eager to work with Jobs, and
Morris had to keep ordering them to surrender their objections and
make a deal quickly. They were able to add a few more restrictions to

FairPlay, the Applesystem of digital rights management, so that a pur
chased song could not be spread to too many devices. But in general,
they went along with the concept of the iTunes Store that Jobs had
workedout with Ames and his Warner colleagues.
Morris was so smitten with Jobs that he called Jimmy Iovine, the
fast-talking and brash chief of Interscope-Geffen-A&M. Iovine and
Morris were best friends who had spoken every dayfor the past thirty
years. "When I met Steve, I thought he was our savior, so I immedi
atelybroughtJimmy in to get his impression," Morris recalled.

400

Walter Isaacson

Jobs could be extraordinarily charming when he wanted to be, and
he turned it on when Iovine flew out to Cupertino for a demo. "See
how simple it is?" he asked Iovine. "Your tech folks are never going to

dothis. There's noone at themusic companies who can make it simple
enough."
Iovine called Morris right away. "This guy is unique!" he said.
"You're right. He's got a turnkey solution." They complained about

how they had spent two years working with Sony, and it hadn't gone
anywhere. "Sony's never going to figure things out," he told Morris.
They agreed to quit dealing with Sony and join with Apple instead.
"How Sony missed this is completely mind-boggling to me, a historic
fiickup," Iovine said. "Steve would fire people if the divisions didn't
work together, but Sony's divisions were at war with one another."

Indeed Sony provided a clear counterexample to Apple. It had a
consumer electronics division that made sleek products and a music
division with beloved artists (including Bob Dylan). But because each
division tried to protectits own interests, the company asawhole never
got its act together to produce an end-to-end service.
Andy Lack, the new head of Sony music, had the unenviable task
of negotiating with Jobs about whether Sony would sell its music in
the iTunes Store. The irrepressible and savvy Lackhadjust come from
a distinguished career in television journalism—a producer at CBS
News and presidentof NBC—and he knewhow to sizepeopleup and
keep his sense of humor. He realized that, for Sony, selling its songs
in the iTunes Storewas both insane and necessary—which seemed to
be the case with a lot of decisions in the music business. Apple would
make out like a bandit, not just from its cut on song sales, but from
drivingthe saleof iPods.Lack believed that sincethe musiccompanies
would be responsible for the success of the iPod, they should get a roy
alty from each device sold.
Jobs would agree with Lack in many of their conversations and
claim that he wanted to be a true partner with the music companies.
"Steve, you've got me ifyoujust give mesomething for every sale ofyour
device," Lack told him in his booming voice. "It's a beautiful device.
But our musicis helping to sellit. That's what true partnership means
to me."

The iTunes Store

401

"I'm with you," Jobs replied on more than one occasion. But then
he would go to Doug Morris and Roger Ames to lament, in a con

spiratorial fashion, that Lack just didn't get it, that he was clueless
about the music business, that he wasn't as smart as Morris and Ames.

"In classic Steve fashion, he would agree to something, but it would
never happen," said Lack. "He would set you up and then pull it off
the table. He's pathological, which can be useful in negotiations. And
he's a genius."
Lack knew that he could not win his case unless he got support

from others in the industry. ButJobs used flattery andthe lure ofAp
ple's marketing clout to keep the other record labels in line. "If the in
dustry had stood together, we could have gotten a license fee, giving us
the dual revenue stream we desperately needed," Lack said. "We were
the ones making the iPod sell, so it would have been equitable." That,
of course, was one of the beauties of Jobs's end-to-end strategy: Sales
of songs on iTunes would drive iPod sales, which would drive Mac
intosh sales. What made it all the more infuriating to Lack was that
Sony could have done the same, but it never could getits hardware and
software and content divisions to row in unison.

Jobs tried hard to seduce Lack. During onevisitto NewYork, he in
vited Lackto hispenthouse at the Four Seasons hotel. Jobs had already
ordered a breakfast spread—oatmeal and berries for them both—and
was "beyond solicitous," Lackrecalled. "ButJackWelch taught me not
to fall in love. Morris and Ames could be seduced. They would say,

'You don't get it, you're supposed to fall in love,' and they did. So I
ended up isolated in the industry."
Even after Sony agreed to sell its music in the iTunes Store, the
relationship remained contentious. Each new round of renewals or
changes would bring a showdown. "With Andy, it was mostly about
his big ego,"Jobs claimed. "He never really understood the music busi
ness, and he could never really deliver. I thought he was sometimes a
dick." When I told him what Jobs said, Lack responded, "I fought for

Sony and the music industry, soI cansee why he thoughtI was a dick."
Corralling the record labels to go along with the iTunes plan was
not enough, however. Many of their artistshad carve-outsin their con
tracts that allowed them personally to control the digital distribution

402

Walter Isaacson

oftheir music orprevent their songs from being unbundled from their
albums and sold singly. So Jobs set about cajoling various top musi
cians, which hefound fun butalso alotharder than he expected.
Before the launch ofiTunes, Jobs met with almost two dozen major
artists, including Bono, Mick Jagger, and Sheryl Crow. "He would call

me at home, relentless, at ten at night, to say he still needed to get to
Led Zeppelin or Madonna," Ames recalled. "He was determined, and
nobody elsecould have convinced someof these artists."
Perhaps the oddest meeting was when Dr.Dre came to visit Jobs at

Apple headquarters. Jobs loved the Beatles and Dylan, but he admit
ted that the appeal of rap eluded him. Now Jobs needed Eminem and
other rappers to agree to be sold in the iTunes Store, so he huddled
with Dr. Dre, who was Eminem's mentor. AfterJobs showed him the

seamless way the iTunes Store would work with theiPod, Dr. Drepro
claimed, "Man, somebody finally gotit right."
On the other end ofthe musical taste spectrum was the trumpeter
Wynton Marsalis. He was on a West Coast fund-raising tourfor Jazz
at Lincoln Center and was meeting with Jobs's wife, Laurene. Jobs
insisted that he come over to the house in Palo Alto, andhe proceeded
to show offiTunes. "What do you want to search for?" he asked Mar
salis. Beethoven, the trumpeter replied. "Watch what it can do!" Jobs
kept insistingwhen Marsalis's attention would wander. "See how the
interface works."Marsalis later recalled, "I don't care much about com

puters, and kept telling him so, but he goes on for two hours. He was
a man possessed. After a while, I started looking at him and not the
computer, because I was so fascinated with his passion."
Jobs unveiled the iTunes Store on April 28, 2003, at San Francisco's
Moscone Center. With hair now closely cropped and receding, and a
studied unshaven look, Jobs paced the stage and described how Nap
ster"demonstrated that the Internet was made for music delivery." Its
offspring, such as Kazaa, he said, offered songs for free. How do you
compete with that?To answer that question, he began by describing
the downsides of using these free services. The downloads were unreli
able andthe quality was often bad. "A lot ofthese songs are encoded by
seven-year-olds, and they don't do a greatjob."In addition, there were

The iTunes Store

403

no previews oralbum art. Then he added, "Worst ofall it's stealing. It's
best not to mess with karma."

Why had these piracy sites proliferated, then? Because, Jobs said,
there was no alternative. The subscription services, such as Pressplay
andMusicNet, "treat you like a criminal," hesaid, showing a slide ofan
inmate in striped prison garb. Then a slide ofBob Dylan came on the
screen. "People want to own the music theylove."
Aftera lot of negotiating withthe record companies, he said, "they
were willing to dosomething with us to change theworld."The iTunes
Store would start with 200,000 tracks, and it would grow each day. By
using the store, he said, you can own your songs, burn them on CDs,
be assured of the download quality, get a preview of a songbefore you
download it, and use it with your iMovies and iDVDs to "make the
soundtrack of your life." The price? Just 99 cents, he said, less than a
third of what a Starbucks latte cost. Why was it worth it? Because to
get the rightsong from Kazaa took about fifteen minutes, rather than
a minute. By spending an hour of your time to save about four dol
lars, he calculated, "you're working for under the minimum wage!" And
one more thing ... "With iTunes, it's not stealing anymore. It's good
karma."

Clapping the loudest for that line were the heads of the record la
bels in the front row, including Doug Morris sitting next to Jimmy
Iovine, in his usual baseball cap, and the whole crowd from Warner
Music. EddyCue, who was in charge ofthe store, predicted that Apple
would sell a million songs in six months. Instead the iTunes Storesold
a million songs in six days. "This will go down in historyas a turning
point for the music industry," Jobs declared.

Microsoft
"We were smoked."

That was the blunt emailsent to four colleagues byJim Allchin, the
Microsoft executive in charge of Windows development, at 5 p.m. the
dayhe sawthe iTunes Store. It had onlyone other line: "How did they
get the music companies to go along?"

404

Walter Isaacson

Later that evening a reply came from David Cole, who was run

ning Microsoft's online business group. "When Apple brings this to
Windows (I assume they won't make the mistake of not bringing it
to Windows), we will really be smoked." He said that the Windows

team needed "to bring this kind ofsolution to market," adding, "That
will require focus and goal alignment around an end-to-end service

which delivers direct user value, something we don't have today." Even
though Microsoft had its ownInternet service (MSN), it was not used

to providing end-to-end service theway Apple was.
Bill Gates himselfweighed in at 10:46 thatnight. His subject line,

"Apple's Jobs again," indicated his frustration. "Steve Jobs's ability to
focus in on a few things that count, get people who get user inter
face right, and market things as revolutionary are amazing things," he
said. He too expressed surprise thatJobs had beenable to convince the
music companies to go along with his store. "This is very strange to

me. The music companies' own operations offer a service that is truly
unfriendly to the user. Somehow they decide to give Apple the ability
to do something prettygood."
Gates also found it strange that no one else had created a service

that allowed people to buy songs rather than subscribe on a monthly
basis. "I am not saying this strangeness means we messed up—at least
ifwe did, so did Real and Pressplay and MusicNet and basically every
one else," he wrote. "Now that Jobs has done it we need to move fast

to get something where the user interface and Rights are as good
I think we need some plan to prove that, even though Jobs has us a
bit flat footed again, we can move quick and both match and do stuff
better." It was an astonishing private admission: Microsoft had again
been caught flat-footed, andit would again try to catch up by copying
Apple. Butlike Sony, Microsoft could never make it happen, even after
Jobs showed the way.
Instead Apple continued to smoke Microsoft in the way that Cole
had predicted: It ported the iTunes software and store to Windows.
But that took some internal agonizing. First,Jobs and his team had to

decide whether they wanted the iPod to work withWindows comput
ers. Jobs was initially opposed. "By keeping the iPod for Mac only, it
was driving the sales ofMacs even more thanweexpected," he recalled.

The iTunes Store

405

But lined up against him were all four of his top executives: Schiller,
Rubinstein, Robbin, and Fadell. It was an argument about what the

future ofApple should be. "We felt we should be in the music player
business, notjust in the Macbusiness," said Schiller.
Jobs always wanted Apple to create its own unified Utopia, a magi
cal walled garden where hardware and software and peripheral devices
worked well together to create a great experience, and where the suc
cess of one product drove sales of all the companions. Now he was
facing pressure to have his hottest new product work withWindows
machines, and it went against his nature. "It was a really big argument
for months," Jobs recalled, "me against everyone else." At one point
he declared that Windows users would get to use iPods "over mydead
body." But still his team kept pushing. "This needs to get to the PC,"
said Fadell.

Finally Jobs declared, "Until you can prove to me that it will make
business sense, I'm not going to do it." That was actually his way of
backing down. If you put aside emotion and dogma, it was easy to
prove thatit made business sense to allow Windows users to buy iPods.
Experts were called in, sales scenarios developed, and everyone con
cluded thiswould bring in more profits. "We developed a spreadsheet,"
said Schiller. "Under all scenarios, there was no amount of cannibal-

ization of Mac sales that would outweigh the sales of iPods." Jobs was
sometimes willing to surrender, despite his reputation, but he never

won any awards for gracious concession speeches. "Screw it,"he said at
onemeeting where they showed him the analysis. "I'msick oflistening
to you assholes. Go do whatever the hellyou want."
That left another question: When Apple allowed the iPod to be
compatible withWindows machines, should it also create a version of
iTunes to serve asthe music-management software for thoseWindows
users? As usual, Jobs believed the hardware and software should go

together: The userexperience depended on the iPodworking in com
plete sync (so to speak) withiTunes software on the computer. Schiller
was opposed. "I thought that was crazy, since we don't make Windows
software," Schiller recalled. "But Steve kept arguing, If we're going to
do it, we should do it right.'"

Schiller prevailed at first. Apple decided to allow the iPod to work

406

Walter Isaacson

withWindows by using software from MusicMatch, an outside com

pany. But the software was so clunky that it proved Jobs's point, and
Apple embarked onafast-track effort toproduce iTunes for Windows.
Jobs recalled:

To make the iPod work on PCs, we initially partnered with another
company that had a jukebox, gave them the secret sauce to connect to
the iPod, and theydid a crappy job. That was the worst of allworlds,

because this other company was controlling a big piece of the user
experience. Sowe lived with this crappy outside jukebox for about six
months, and then we finally got iTunes written for Windows. In the

end, you justdon't want someone else to control a big partof the user
experience. People may disagree with me, but I am pretty consistent
about that.

Porting iTunes to Windows meant going back to all of the music
companies—whichhad made deals to be in iTunes based on the assur

ance that it wouldbe for onlythe small universe of Macintoshusers—

and negotiate again. Sony was especially resistant. Andy Lack thought
it another example ofJobs changing the terms after a deal was done.
It was. But bythen the other labels were happy about how the iTunes

Store was working and went along, so Sony was forced to capitulate.
Jobs announced the launch of iTunes for Windows in October

2003. "Here's a feature that people thought we'd never add until this
happened," he said, waving his hand at the giant screen behind him.

"Hell froze over," proclaimed the slide. The show included iChat ap
pearances and videos from MickJagger, Dr. Dre, and Bono. "It's avery
cool thing for musicians and music," Bono said of the iPod and iTunes.

"That's why I'mhere to kiss the corporate ass. I don't kiss everybody's."
Jobswas never proneto understatement. To the cheers of the crowd,

he declared, "iTunes for Windows is probably the best Windows app
ever written."

Microsoft was not grateful. "They're pursuing the same strategy that
they pursued in the PC business, controlling both the hardware and
software," Bill Gates told Business Week. "We've always done things

The iTunes Store

407

a little bit differently than Apple in terms of giving people choice."
It was not until three years later, in November 2006, that Microsoft
was finally able to release its own answer tothe iPod. It was called the
Zune, andit looked like an iPod, though a bit clunkier. Two years later
it had achieved a market share of less than 5%.Jobs was brutal about

the cause of the Zune's uninspired design and market weakness:
The older I get, the more I see how much motivations matter. The
Zune was crappy because the people atMicrosoft don't really love music
or art the way we do. We won because we personally love music. We
made the iPod for ourselves, and when you're doing something for

yourself, oryour best friend orfamily, you're notgoing to cheese out. If
you don't love something, you're notgoing togotheextra mile, work the
extraweekend, challenge the status quo as much.

Mr. Tambourine Man

Andy Lack's first annual meeting at Sony was in April 2003, the same
week that Apple launched the iTunes Store. He had been made head
of the music division four months earlier, and had spent much of that

time negotiating withJobs. In fact he arrived in Tokyo directly from
Cupertino, carrying the latest version ofthe iPod and a description of
the iTunes Store. In front of the two hundred managers gathered, he
pulled the iPod out of his pocket. "Here it is," he said as CEO No-

buyuki Idei and Sony's North America head Howard Stringer looked
on. "Here's the Walkman killer. There's no mystery meat.The reason

you bought a music company isso thatyou could be the one to make a
device like this. You can do better."

But Sonycouldn't. It had pioneered portable music with the Walk
man, it had a greatrecord company, and it had a long history of mak
ingbeautiful consumer devices. It had all of the assets to compete with
Jobs's strategy of integration of hardware, software, devices, and con
tent sales. Why did it fail? Partly because it was a company, like AOL
Time Warner, that was organized into divisions (that word itselfwas
ominous) with their own bottom lines; the goal of achieving synergy

408

Walter Isaacson

insuch companies by prodding the divisions to work together was usu
allyelusive.

Jobs did not organize Apple into semiautonomous divisions; he
closely controlled all of his teams and pushed them to work as one
cohesive and flexible company, with one profit-and-loss bottom line.
"We don't have 'divisions' with theirown P&L," said Tim Cook. "We
run one P&L for the company."
In addition, like many companies, Sony worried about cannibaliza-

tion. If it built a music player and service that made it easy for people
to share digital songs, that mighthurt sales of its record division. One

ofJobs's business rules was to never be afraid ofcannibalizing yourself.
"If you don't cannibalize yourself, someone else will," he said. So even

though an iPhone might cannibalize sales ofan iPod, oran iPad might
cannibalize sales of a laptop, that did not deterhim.

That July, Sony appointed a veteran of the music industry, Jay
Samit, to create its own iTunes-like service, called Sony Connect,
which would sell songs online and allow them to play on Sony's por
table music devices. "The move was immediately understood as a
way to unite the sometimes conflicting electronics and content divi

sions," the New York Times reported. "That internal battle was seen by
many as thereason Sony, theinventor oftheWalkman and the biggest
player in the portable audio market, was being trounced by Apple."
Sony Connect launched in May 2004. It lasted just over three years
before Sony shut it down.

Microsoft was willing to license its Windows Media software and
digital rights format to other companies, just as it had licensed out
its operating system in the 1980s.Jobs, on the other hand, would not

license out Apple's FairPlay to other device makers; it worked only on
aniPod. Norwould he allow other online stores to sell songs foruse on
iPods. A variety of experts said this would eventually cause Apple to
lose market share, as it didin thecomputer wars ofthe 1980s. "IfApple
continues to rely on a proprietaryarchitecture," the Harvard Business

School professor Clayton Christensen told Wired, "theiPod will likely
becomea niche product."(Other than in this case, Christensen wasone

of the world's most insightful business analysts, andJobs was deeply

The iTunes Store

409

influenced by his book The Innovators Dilemma.) Bill Gates made the
same argument. "There's nothing unique about music," he said. "This
storyhas played out on the PC."
Rob Glaser, the founder of RealNetworks, tried to circumvent

Apple's restrictions in July 2004 with a service called Harmony. He
had attempted to convince Jobs to license Apple's FairPlay format to
Harmony, butwhen that didn't happen, Glaser justreverse-engineered
it and used it with the songs that Harmonysold. Glaser's strategywas

that the songs sold by Harmony would play on any device, including
an iPod or a Zune or a Rio, and he launched a marketing campaign

with the slogan "Freedom of Choice." Jobs was furious and issued a
release saying thatApple was "stunned thatRealNetworks has adopted
the tactics and ethics of a hacker to break into the iPod." RealNet

works responded by launching an Internet petition that demanded
"HeyApple! Don'tbreak my iPod." Jobs kept quiet for a few months,
but in October he released a new version of the iPod software that

caused songs bought through Harmony to become inoperable. "Steve
is a one-of-a-kind guy," Glaser said. "You know that about him when
you do business with him."
In the meantime Jobs and his team—Rubinstein, Fadell, Robbin,

Ive—were able to keep coming up with new versions of the iPod that
extended Apple's lead. The first major revision, announced in January
2004, was the iPod Mini. Far smaller than the originaliPod—justthe
size of a business card—it had less capacity and was about the same
price. At one pointJobs decided to kill it,notseeing why anyone would
wantto pay the same forless. "He doesn't do sports, so he didn't relate
to how it would be great on a run or in the gym," said Fadell. In fact
the Mini was what truly launched the iPod to market dominance, by
eliminating the competition from smaller flash-drive players. In the
eighteen months after it was introduced, Apple's market share in the
portable music player market shot from 31% to 74%.
The iPod Shuffle, introduced in January 2005, was even more rev

olutionary. Jobs learned that the shuffle feature on the iPod, which
played songs in random order, had become verypopular. People Uked
to be surprised, and theywere also too lazy to keep settingup and re
vising their playlists. Some users even became obsessed with figuring

410

Walter Isaacson

out whether the song selection was truly random, and if so, why their
iPod keptcoming back to,say, the Neville Brothers. That feature ledto

the iPod Shuffle. As Rubinstein and Fadell were working on creating a
flash player that was small and inexpensive, they kept doing things like
making the screen tinier. At one point Jobs came inwith a crazy sug
gestion: Getrid ofthe screen altogether. "What?!?" Fadell responded.
"Just get rid ofit,"Jobs insisted. Fadell asked how users would navigate
the songs. Jobs's insight was that you wouldn't need to navigate; the
songs would play randomly. After all, they were songs you had chosen.
All that was needed was a button to skip over a song ifyou weren't in
the mood forit. "Embrace uncertainty," the ads read.
As competitors stumbled and Apple continued to innovate, music
became a larger part of Apple's business. In January 2007 iPod sales
were half of Apple's revenues. The device also added luster to the

Apple brand. But an even bigger success was the iTunes Store. Having
sold one million songs in the first sbc days after it was introduced in
April 2003, the store went on to sell seventy million songs in its first
year. In February 2006 the store sold itsone billionth song when Alex
Ostrovsky, sixteen, ofWest Bloomfield, Michigan, bought Coldplay's
"Speed of Sound" and got a congratulatory call from Jobs, bestowing
upon himten iPods, an iMac, and a $10,000 music giftcertificate.
The success ofthe iTunes Store also had a more subtle benefit. By
2011 an important new business had emerged: being the service that
people trusted with their online identity and payment information.
Along with Amazon, Visa, PayPal, American Express, and a few other
services, Apple hadbuiltup databases ofpeople whotrusted themwith
their email address and credit card information to facilitate safe and

easy shopping. This allowed Apple to sell, for example, a magazine
subscription through its online store; when that happened, Apple, not
the magazine publisher, would have a direct relationship with the sub
scriber. AstheiTunes Store sold videos, apps, and subscriptions, it built
up a database of 225 million active users byJune 2011, which posi
tioned Apple for the next age of digital commerce.

CHAPTER

THIRTY-TWO

MUSIC MAN
The Sound Track of His Life

Jimmy Iovine, BonoyJobs, andTheEdge> 2004

On His iPod

As the iPod phenomenon grew, it spawned a question that was asked
of presidential candidates, B-list celebrities, first dates, the queen of
England, and just about anyone else with white earbuds: "What's on
your iPod?" The parlor game took off when Elisabeth Bumiller wrote
a piece in the NewYork Times in early 2005 dissecting the answer that
President George W. Bush gave when she asked him that question.
"Bush's iPod is heavy on traditional countrysingers," she reported. "He
has selections by Van Morrison, whose 'Brown Eyed Girl' is a Bush
favorite, and byJohn Fogerty, most predictably 'Centerfield.'" She got
411

412

Walter Isaacson

a Rolling Stone editor, Joe Levy, to analyze the selection, and he com
mented, "One thing that's interesting is that the president likes artists
who don't like him."

"Simply handing over your iPod to a friend, your blind date, or
the total stranger sitting next to you on the plane opens you up like a
book," Steven Levy wrote in The Perfect Thing. "All somebody needs
to do is scroll through your library on that click wheel, and, musically
speaking, you're naked. It's not just what you like—its who you are''
So one day, when we were sitting in his living room listening to music,
I asked Jobs to let me see his. As we sat there, he flicked through his
favorite songs.

Not surprisingly, there were all six volumes of Dylan's bootleg se
ries, including the tracks Jobs had first started worshipping when he
and Wozniak were able toscore them onreel-to-reel tapes years before
the series was officially released. In addition, there were fifteen other

Dylan albums, starting with his first, Bob Dylan (1962), butgoing only
upto Oh Mercy (1989). Jobs had spent alotoftime arguing with Andy
Hertzfeld and others that Dylan's subsequent albums, indeed any of
his albums after Blood on the Tracks (1975), were not as powerful as
his early performances. The one exception he made was Dylan's track
"Things Have Changed" from the 2000 movie Wonder Boys. Nota
blyhis iPod did not include Empire Burlesque (1985), the album that
Hertzfeld hadbrought him theweekend hewas ousted from Apple.
The other great trove on his iPod was the Beatles. He included
songs from seven of their albums: A Hard Days Night, Abbey Road,
Help!, LetItBe, MagicalMystery Tour, Meet the Beatles! and SgtPepper's
Lonely Hearts Club Band. The solo albums missed the cut. The Rolling
Stones clocked in next, with six albums: Emotional Rescue, Flashpoint,
Jump Back, Some Girls, Sticky Fingers', and Tattoo You. In the caseof the
Dylan and the Beatles albums, most were included in their entirety.
But true to his beliefthat albums can and should be disaggregated,
those of the Stones and most other artists on his iPod included only
three or four cuts. His onetime girlfriend Joan Baez was amply repre
sentedby selections fromfour albums, includingtwo differentversions
of"Love Is Just a Four-Letter Word."
His iPod selections were those of a kid from the seventies with

Music Man

413

his heart in the sixties. There were Aretha, B. B. King, Buddy Holly,

Buffalo Springfield, Don McLean, Donovan, the Doors, Janis Joplin,Jefferson Airplane, JimiHendrix, Johnny Cash, John Mellencamp,
Simon and Garfiinkel, and evenThe Monkees ("I'm a Believer") and

Sam the Sham ("Wooly Bully"). Only about a quarter of the songs
were from more contemporary artists, such as 10,000 Maniacs, Alicia

Keys, Black Eyed Peas, Coldplay, Dido, Green Day, John Mayer (a
friend of both his andApple), Moby (likewise), U2, Seal, andTalking
Heads. As for classical music, there were a few recordings of Bach,

including the Brandenburg Concertos, andthree albums byYo-Yo Ma.
Jobstold Sheryl Crowin May2003 that he was downloading some
Eminem tracks, admitting, "He's startingto growon me." James Vin
centsubsequently tookhimto anEminem concert. Even so, the rapper
missed making it ontoJobs's iPod. As Jobs said to Vincent after the
concert, "I don't know..." He later told me, "I respect Eminem as an

artist, but I just don'twant to listen to his music, and I can't relate to
his values the wayI can to Dylan's."
His favorites did not change over the years. When the iPad 2 came
out in March 2011, he transferred his favorite music to it. One after

noonwe sat in his living room as he scrolled through the songs on his
new iPad and, with a mellow nostalgia, tapped on ones he wanted to
hear.

Wewent throughthe usual DylanandBeatles favorites, then he be
came more reflective and tapped on a Gregorian chant, "Spiritus Do
mini," performed by Benedictine monks. For a minute or so he zoned
out, almostin a trance. "That's really beautiful," he murmured. He fol
lowed with Bach's Second Brandenburg Concerto and a fugue from
The Well-Tempered Clavier. Bach, he declared, was his favorite classical
composer. He was particularly fond of listening to the contrasts be
tween the two versions of the "GoldbergVariations" that Glenn Gould
recorded, the first in 1955 as a twenty-two-year-old little-known pia
nist and the second in 1981,a yearbefore he died."They're like night
and day,"Jobs saidafterplaying them sequentially one afternoon. "The
first is an exuberant, young, brilliant piece, played so fast it's a revela
tion. The later one is so much more spare and stark. You sense a very
deep soul who's been through a lot in life. It's deeper and wiser." Jobs

414

Walter Isaacson

was onhis third medical leave thatafternoon when heplayed bothver
sions, and I asked which he liked better. "Gould liked the later version

much better," he said. "I used to like the earlier, exuberant one. But
nowI can see where he was coming from."
He then jumped from the sublime to the sixties: Donovan's "Catch

the Wind." When he noticed me look askance, he protested, "Dono
van did some really good stuff, really." He punched up "Mellow Yel
low," and then admitted that perhaps it was not the best example. "It
sounded betterwhenwewere young."
I asked what music from ourchildhood actually held up well these
days. He scrolled down the list on his iPad and called up the Grateful
Dead's 1969 song "Uncle John's Band." He nodded along with thelyr
ics: "When life looks like Easy Street, there isdanger atyour door." For
a moment we were back at that tumultuous time when the mellowness

of the sixties was endingin discord. "Whoa, oh, what I want to know
is, are you kind?"

Then he turned to Joni Mitchell. "She had a kid she put up for
adoption," he said. "This song is about her little girl." He tapped on
"Little Green," and we listened to themournful melody andlyrics that
describe the feelings ofa mother who gives up a child. "So you sign all
the papers in the family name / You're sad and you're sorry, but you're
not ashamed." I asked whether he still often thought about being put
up for adoption. "No, not much," he said. "Not too often."

These days, he said, he thought more about getting older than
about his birth. That led him to play Joni Mitchell's greatest song,
"Both Sides Now," with its lyrics about being older and wiser: "I've
looked at life from both sides now, / From win and lose,and still some
how, / It's life's illusions I recall, / I really don't know life at all." As
Glenn Gould had done with Bach's "Goldberg Variations," Mitchell

had recorded "Both Sides Now" many years apart, first in 1969 and
then in an excruciatingly haunting slow version in 2000. He played the
latter. "It's interesting howpeople age," he noted.
Some people, he added, don't age well even when they are young.
I asked who he had in mind. "John Mayer is one of the best guitar
players who's ever lived, and I'm just afraid he's blowing it big time,"
Jobs replied. Jobs liked Mayer and occasionally had him overfor din-

Music Man

415

ner in Palo Alto. When he was twenty-seven, Mayer appeared at the

January 2004 Macworld, where Jobs introduced GarageBand, and he
became a fixture at the event mostyears. Jobs punched up Mayer's hit
"Gravity." The lyrics are about a guy filled with love who inexplicably
dreams ofways to throw it away: "Gravity isworking against me, / And
gravity wants to bringmedown."Jobs shook hisheadand commented,
"I think he's a really good kid underneath, but he's just been out of
control."

At the end of the listening session, I asked him a well-worn ques
tion: the Beatlesor the Stones? "If the vaultwason fireand I could grab

only one set of master tapes, I would grab the Beatles," he answered.
"The hard one would be between the Beatles and Dylan. Somebody
else could have replicated the Stones. No one could have been Dylan
or the Beatles." As he was ruminating about how fortunate we were
to have all of them when we were growing up, his son, then eigh
teen, came in the room. "Reed doesn't understand," Jobs lamented. Or

perhaps he did. He was wearing a Joan Baez T-shirt, with the words
"Forever Young" on it.

Bob Dylan
The only time Jobs can ever recall being tongue-tied was in the pres
ence of Bob Dylan. He was playing near Palo Alto in October 2004,
and Jobs was recovering from his first cancersurgery. Dylan was not a
gregarious man, not a Bono or a Bowie. He wasneverJobs's friend, nor
did he care to be. He did, however,invite Jobs to visit him at his hotel
before the concert. Jobs recalled:
We sat on the patio outside his room and talked for two hours. I was
reallynervous, because he was one of my heroes. And I was also afraid
that he wouldn't be really smart anymore, that heel be a caricature of
himself, like happens to a lot of people. But I was delighted. He was
as sharp as a tack. He was everything Id hoped. He was really open
and honest. He was just telling me about his life and about writing his
songs. He said,"They just came through me, it wasn'tlike I was having

416

Walter Isaacson

to compose them. That doesn't happen anymore, I justcan't write them

that way anymore." Then he paused and said to me with his raspy voice
andlittle smile, "ButI still cansing them."

The next time Dylan played nearby, he invited Jobs to drop by his
tricked-up tour bus just before the concert. When Dylan asked what
his favorite song was, Jobs said "One Too Many Mornings." So Dylan
sang it that night. After the concert, as Jobs was walking out the back,
the tour bus came by and screeched to a stop. The door flipped open.
"So, did you hear my song I sang for you?" Dylan rasped. Then he
drove off. WhenJobs tells thetale, hedoes apretty good impression of
Dylan's voice. "He's one ofmy all-time heroes,"Jobs recalled. "My love
forhimhas grown over the years, it's ripened. I can't figure out how he
did it when he was soyoung."

A few months after seeing him in concert, Jobs came up with a
grandiose plan. The iTunes Store should offer a digital "boxed set" of
every Dylan song every recorded, more than seven hundred in all, for

$199. Jobs would be the curator ofDylan for the digital age. ButAndy
Lack of Sony, whichwas Dylan's label, was in no mood to make a deal
withoutsome serious concessions regarding iTunes. In addition, Lack
felt the price was toolowandwould cheapen Dylan. "Bob is a national

treasure," said Lack, "and Steve wanted him on iTunes at a price that
commoditized him." It got to the heart of the problems that Lackand
other record executives were having withJobs: He was getting to set
the price points, not them. So Lack said no.
"Okay, then I will call Dylan directly," Jobs said. But it was not

the type of thingthat Dylan ever dealt with, soit fell to his agent, Jeff
Rosen,to sort things out.
"It's a really bad idea," Lack told Rosen, showing him the num
bers. "Bob is Steve's hero. He'll sweeten the deal." Lack had both a

professional and a personal desire to fend Jobs off, even to yank his
chain a bit. So he made an offer to Rosen. "I will write you a check
for a million dollars tomorrow if you hold off for the time being." As
Lack later explained, it was an advance against future royalties, "one
of those accounting things record companies do." Rosen called back
forty-five minutes laterand accepted. "Andy worked thingsout with us

Music Man

417

and asked us not to do it, which we didn't," he recalled. "I think Andy

gave us some sort of an advance to holdoffdoing it."
By2006, however, Lackhad stepped aside asthe CEO ofwhatwas
by then Sony BMG, andJobs reopened negotiations. He sent Dylan
an iPod with all of his songs on it, and he showed Rosen the type
of marketing campaign that Apple could mount. In August he an
nounced a grand deal. It allowed Apple to sell the $199 digital boxed
set of allthe songs Dylan ever recorded, plus the exclusive right to offer
Dylan's new album, Modern Times, for pre-release orders. "Bob Dylan
is one of the most respected poets and musicians of our time, and he
is a personal hero of mine," Jobs said at the announcement. The 773track set included forty-two rarities, such as a 1961 tape of "Wade in
the Water" made in a Minnesota hotel, a 1962 version of "Handsome

Molly" from a live concert at the Gaslight Cafe in Greenwich Vil
lage, the truly awesome rendition of "Mr.Tambourine Man" from the
1964 Newport Folk Festival (Jobs's favorite), and an acoustic version
of "Outlaw Blues" from 1965.

As part of the deal, Dylan appeared in a television ad for the iPod,
featuring his new album,Modern Times. This was one of the most as
tonishing cases of flipping the script since Tom Sawyer persuaded his
friends to whitewash the fence. In the past, getting celebrities to do an
ad required paying them a lot of money. But by 2006 the tables were
turned. Major artists wanted to appearin iPod ads;the exposure would
guarantee success. James Vincent had predicted this a few years earlier,
when Jobs said he had contacts with many musicians and could pay
them to appearin ads. "No, things are going to soon change," Vincent
replied. "Apple is a different kind of brand, and it's cooler than the
brand of most artists. We should talk about the opportunity we offer
the bands, not pay them."
Lee Clow recalled that there was actually some resistance among
the youngerstaffers at Apple and the ad agency to using Dylan."They
wondered whether he was still cool enough," Clow said. Jobs would
hear none of that. He was thrilled to have Dylan.
Jobs became obsessed by every detail of the Dylan commercial.
Rosen flew to Cupertino so that they couldgo through the album and
pick the song they wanted to use, which ended up being "Someday

418

Walter Isaacson

Baby." Jobs approved a test video that Clow made using a stand-in
for Dylan, which was then shot in Nashville with Dylan himself. But
when it came back, Jobs hated it. It wasn't distinctive enough. He
wanted a new style. So Clow hired another director, and Rosen was

able to convince Dylan to retape the entire commercial. This time it
was done with a gently backlit cowboy-hatted Dylan sitting on a stool,
strumming and singing, while a hip woman in a newsboy cap dances
with her iPod. Jobs loved it.

The ad showed the halo effect of the iPod's marketing: It helped
Dylan win a younger audience, just as the iPod had done for Apple
computers. Because of the ad, Dylan's album was number one on the
Billboard chart its first week, topping hot-selling albums by Christina
Aguilera and Outkast. It was the first time Dylan had reached the
top spot since Desire in 1976, thirty years earlier. AdAge headlined

Apple's role in propelling Dylan. "The iTunes spot wasn't just a
run-of-the-mill celebrity-endorsement deal in which a big brand
signs a big check to tap into the equity of a big star," it reported. "This
one flipped the formula, with the all-powerful Apple brand giving
Mr. Dylan access to younger demographics and helping propel his
sales to places they hadn't been since the Ford administration."

The Beatles

Among Jobs's prized CDs was a bootleg that contained a dozen or
so taped sessions of the Beatles revising "Strawberry Fields Forever."
It became the musical score to his philosophy of how to perfect a
product. Andy Hertzfeldhad found the CD and made a copyof it for
Jobs in 1986, though Jobs sometimes told folks that it had come from
Yoko Ono. Sitting in the living room of his Palo Alto home one day,
Jobs rummaged around in some glass-enclosed bookcases to find it,
then put it on while describing what it had taught him:
It's a complex song, and it's fascinating to watch the creative process as
they went back and forth and finally createdit over a few months. Lennon was always my favorite Beade. [He laughs as Lennon stops during

Music Man

419

the first take and makes the band go back and revise a chord.] Did
you hear that little detour they took? It didn't work, so they went back
and started from where theywere. It's so rawin this version. It actually
makes them sound like mere mortals. You could actually imagine other
people doing this, up to this version. Maybe not writing and conceiv
ing it, but certainly playing it. Yet theyjust didn't stop. They were such
perfectionists they keptit going and going. This made a big impression
on me when I was in my thirties. You couldjust tell how much they
worked at this.

They did a bundle of work between each of these recordings. They
kept sending it backto make it closer to perfect. [As he listens to the
third take,he points out howthe instrumentation hasgotten more com
plex.] The waywe buildstuffat Apple is often this way. Eventhe num
ber of models we'd make of a new notebook or iPod. We would start

off with a version and then begin refining and refining, doing detailed
models of the design, or the buttons, or how a function operates. It's a
lot of work, but in the end it just gets better, and soon it's like,"Wow,
how did they do that?!? Where are the screws?"

It was thus understandable that Jobs was driven to distraction by the
fact that the Beatles were not on iTunes.

His strugglewith Apple Corps, the Beatles' business holding com
pany, stretched more than three decades, causing too manyjournalists
to use the phrase"longandwindingroad" in stories about the relation
ship. It began in 1978,when Apple Computers, soon after its launch,
was sued by Apple Corps for trademark infringement, based on the
fact that the Beatles' former recording labelwas calledApple.The suit
wassettledthreeyears later, whenApple Computers paidApple Corps
$80,000. The settlement had what seemed back then an innocuous

stipulation:The Beatles would not produce any computer equipment
and Apple would not market any music products.
The Beatles kept their end of the bargain; none of them ever pro
duced any computers. But Apple ended up wandering into the music
business. It got sued again in 1991, when the Mac incorporated the
abilityto playmusical files, then again in 2003,when the iTunes Store
was launched. The legal issues were finally resolved in 2007, when

420

Walter Isaacson

Apple made a deal to pay Apple Corps $500 million for allworldwide
rights to the name, and then licensed back to the Beatles the right to
use Apple Corps for their record and business holdings.
Alas, this did not resolve the issue of getting the Beatles onto
iTunes. For that to happen, the Beatles and EMI Music, which held
the rights to mostof theirsongs, had to negotiate their owndifferences
over how to handle the digital rights. "The Beatles all want to be on
iTunes," Jobs laterrecalled, "buttheyand EMI are like an old married
couple. Theyhate each other but can't get divorced. The fact that my
favorite bandwas the last holdout from iTunes was something I very
much hoped I would live to resolve." As it turned out, he would.

Bono

Bono, the lead singer of U2, deeply appreciated Apple's marketing
muscle. He was confident that his Dublin-based band was still the

best in the world, but in 2004 it was trying, after almost thirty years
together, to reinvigorate its image. It had produced an exciting new
album with a song that the bands lead guitarist,The Edge, declared to
be "the motherof all rock tunes." Bono knew he needed to find a way
to get it some traction, so he placed a callto Jobs.
"I wanted something specific from Apple," Bono recalled. "We
had a song called 'Vertigo' that featured an aggressive guitar riff that
I knew would be contagious, but only if people were exposed to it
many, manytimes." He was worried that the era of promoting a song
through airplay on the radio was over. So Bono visited Jobs at home
in Palo Alto, walked around the garden, and made an unusual pitch.
Over the years U2 had spurned offers as high as $23 million to be in
commercials. Now he wanted Jobs to use the band in an iPod com

mercial for free—or at least as part of a mutually beneficial package.
"They had never done a commercial before," Jobs later recalled. "But
they were getting ripped off by free downloading, they liked what we
were doing with iTunes, and they thought we could promote them to
a younger audience."
Any other CEO would have jumped into a mosh pit to have U2

Music Man

421

in an ad, but Jobs pushed back a bit. Apple didn't feature recognizable
people in the iPod ads, just silhouettes. (The Dylan ad had not yet
been made.) "You have silhouettes of fans," Bono replied, "so couldn't
the next phase be silhouettes of artists?" Jobs said it sounded like an
idea worth exploring. Bono left a copy of the unreleased album, How
toDismantle anAtomic Bomb, forJobs to hear. "He was the only person
outside the band who had it," Bono said.

A round of meetings ensued. Jobs flew down to talk to Jimmy
Iovine, whose Interscope records distributed U2, at his house in the
Holmby Hills sectionof Los Angeles. The Edge was there, alongwith
U2'smanager, PaulMcGuinness. Another meetingtook place in Jobs's
kitchen, with McGuinness writing down the deal points in the back
of his diary. U2 would appear in the commercial, and Apple would
vigorously promote the album in multiple venues, ranging from bill
boards to the iTunes homepage. The band wouldget no direct fee,but
it would get royalties from the sale of a special U2 edition of the iPod.
Bono believed, like Lack, that the musicians should get a royalty on
each iPod sold,and this washis small attempt to assertthe principlein
a limited way for his band. "Bono and I asked Steveto make us a black
one,"Iovinerecalled. "We weren'tjust doing a commercial sponsorship,
we were making a co-branding deal."
"We wanted our own iPod, something distinct from the regular
white ones," Bono recalled. "We wanted black, but Steve said, 'We've

tried other colors than white, and they don't work.' "A few days later
Jobs relented and accepted the idea,tentatively.
The commercial interspersed high-voltage shots of the band in
partial silhouettewith the usualsilhouette of a dancingwoman listen
ing to an iPod. But evenas it wasbeing shot in London, the agreement
with Apple was unraveling. Jobs began having second thoughts about
the idea of a special black iPod, and the royalty rates were not fully
pinned down. He called James Vincent, at Apple's ad agency, and told
him to call London and put things on hold."I don't think it's going to
happen," Jobs said. "They don't realize how much value we are giving
them, it's going south. Let's think of some other ad to do." Vincent, a
lifelongU2 fan, knew how big the ad would be, both for the band and
Apple, and begged for the chance to call Bono to try to get things on

422

Walter Isaacson

track. Jobs gave him Bono's mobile number, and he reached the singer
in his kitchen in Dublin.

Bono was also having a few second thoughts. "I don't think this
is going to work," he told Vincent. "The band is reluctant." Vincent

asked what the problem was. "When we were teenagers in Dublin,
we said we would never do naffstuff," Bono replied. Vincent, despite
being British and familiar with rock slang, said he didn't know what
that meant. "Doing rubbishy things for money," Bono explained. "We
are all about our fans. We feel like we'd be letting them down if we
went in an ad. It doesn't feel right. I'm sorrywe wastedyour time."
Vincentasked what more Applecould do to makeit work. "We are
giving you the most important thing we have to give, and that's our
music," said Bono. "And what are you giving us back? Advertising, and
our fans willthink it's for you. We need something more." Vincent re
pliedthat the offer of the special U2 edition of the iPod and the royalty
arrangement was a huge deal. "That'sthe mostprizedthingwe have to
give," he told Bono.
The singer said he was ready to try to put the deal back together,
so Vincent immediately called Jony Ive, another big U2 fan (he had
first seen them in concert in Newcastle in 1983), and described the

situation. Then he called Jobs and suggested he send Ive to Dublin to
showwhat the blackiPodwould looklike. Jobs agreed. Vincent called
Bono back, and asked if he knewJony Ive, unaware that they had met
beforeand admiredeachother."KnowJony Ive?" Bono laughed."I love
that guy. I drink his bathwater."
"That's a bit strong," Vincent replied, "but how about letting him
comevisit and show how coolyour iPod would be?"
"I'm going to pick him up myselfin my Maserati," Bono answered.
"He's going to stay at my house,I'm going to take him out, and I will
get him reallydrunk."
The next day, as Ive headedtowardDublin, Vincent had to fend off
Jobs,who was still havingsecondthoughts."I don't know if we'redoing
the right thing," he said. "We don't want to do this for anyone else."
He was worried about setting the precedent of artists getting a royalty
from each iPod sold. Vincent assured him that the U2 deal would be

special.

Music Man

423

"Jony arrived in Dublin and I put him up at my guest house, a se
rene place over a railway trackwith a view of the sea," Bono recalled.
"He shows me this beautiful black iPod with a deep red click wheel,
and I say okay, we'll do it."They went to a local pub, hashedout some
of the details, and then called Jobs in Cupertino to see if he would
agree. Jobs haggled for a while over each detail of the finances, and
over the design, before he finally embraced the deal. That impressed
Bono. "It's actually amazing that a CEO cares that much about detail,"
he said. When it was resolved, Ive and Bono settled into some serious

drinking. Both are comfortable in pubs. After a fewpints, they decided
to call Vincent back in California. He was not home, so Bono left a

message on his answering machine, which Vincent made sure never
to erase. "I'm sitting here in bubbling Dublin with your friend Jony,"
it said. "We're both a bit drunk, and we're happywith this wonderful
iPod and I can't even believe it exists and I'm holding it in my hand.
Thank you!"
Jobs rented a theater in SanJose for the unveiling of the TV com
mercial and special iPod.BonoandThe Edgejoined him onstage. The
album sold 840,000 copies in its firstweek and debuted at number one
on the Billboard chart. Bono told the press afterward that he had done
the commercial without chargebecause "U2 will get as much value out
of the commercial as Apple will." Jimmy Iovine added that it would
allowthe band to "reacha younger audience."
What was remarkable was that associating with a computer and
electronics companywas the best wayfor a rock band to seem hip and
appeal to young people. Bono later explained that not all corporate
sponsorships were deals with the devil. "Let's have a look," he told
Greg Kot,the Chicago Tribune music critic. "The 'devil' here is a bunch
of creative minds, more creative than a lot of people in rock bands.
The lead singeris Steve Jobs.These men have helped design the most
beautiful art objectin music culture since the electric guitar. That's the
iPod.The job of art is to chase ugliness away."
Bono got Jobs to do another deal with him in 2006, this one for
his Product Red campaign that raised money and awareness to fight
AIDS in Africa.Jobswas never much interested in philanthropy, but he
agreed to do a special red iPod as part of Bono's campaign. It was not a

424

Walter Isaacson

wholehearted commitment. He balked, for example, at using the cam
paign's signature treatment ofputting the name ofthe company in pa
rentheses with the word "red" in superscript afterit, asin (APPLE)1^0.
"I don't wantApple in parentheses," Jobs insisted. Bono replied, "But
Steve, that's how we show unity for our cause." The conversation got
heated—to the F-you stage—before they agreed to sleep on it. Finally
Jobs compromised, sort of. Bono could do what he wanted in his ads,
but Jobswould never put Apple in parentheses on anyof his products
or in any of his stores. The iPod was labeled (PRODUCT)1^0, not
(APPLE)**0.

"Steve can be sparky," Bono recalled, "but those moments have
made us closer friends, because there are not many people in yourlife
where you can have those robust discussions. He's very opinionated.
After our shows, I talkto him and he's always got an opinion."Jobs and
his family occasionally visited Bonoand hiswife and four kids at their
home near Nice on the French Riviera. On one vacation, in 2008,Jobs
chartereda boat and moored it near Bono's home.They ate meals to
gether, and Bono played tapes of the songs U2 was preparing for what
became the NoLine on the Horizon album. But despite the friendship,
Jobswas still a tough negotiator. They tried to makea dealfor another
ad and special release of the song"Get On Your Boots," but they could
not come to terms. When Bono hurt his back in 2010 and had to can

cel a tour, Powell sent him a gift basket with a DVD of the comedy
duo Flight of the Conchords, the bookMozart's Brain and the Fighter
Pilot, honeyfrom her beehives, and pain cream. Jobs wrote a note and
attached it to the last item, saying, "Pain Cream—I love this stuff."

Yo-YoMa

There was one classical musician Jobs revered both as a person and
as a performer: Yo-Yo Ma, the versatile virtuoso who is as sweet and
profound as the tones he creates on his cello. They had met in 1981,
when Jobs was at the Aspen Design Conference and Ma was at the
Aspen Music Festival. Jobs tended to be deeply moved by artists who
displayed purity, and he became a fan. He invited Ma to play at his

Music Man

425

wedding, but he was out of the country on tour. He came by the Jobs
house a few years later, sat in the living room, pulled out his 1733
Stradivarius cello, and played Bach. "This is what I would haveplayed
for your wedding," he told them. Jobs teared up and told him, "You
playing is the best argument I've ever heard for the existence of God,
because I don't really believe a human alone can do this." On a sub
sequent visit Ma allowed Jobs's daughter Erin to hold the cello while
they sat around the kitchen. Bythat timeJobs had been struckby can
cer, and he made Ma promise to playat his funeral.

CHAPTER

THIRTY-THREE

PIXAR'S FRIENDS
. .. and Foes

A Bugs Life
When Apple developed the iMac, Jobs drove withJony Ive to show it
to the folks at Pixar. He felt that the machine had the spunky person

ality that would appeal to the creators of Buzz Lightyear andWoody,
and he loved the fact that Ive and John Lasseter shared the talent to
connectart with technology in a playful way.

Pixar was a haven where Jobs could escape the intensity in Cuper

tino. At Apple, the managers were often excitable andexhausted, Jobs
tended to be volatile, and people felt nervous about where theystood
with him.At Pixar, the storytellers andillustrators seemed more serene
and behaved more gently, both with each other and even with Jobs.
In other words, the tone at each place was set at the top, by Jobs at
Apple, but by Lasseter at Pixar.
Jobs reveled in the earnest playfulness of moviemaking and got

passionate about the algorithms that enabled such magic as allowing
computer-generated raindrops to refract sunbeams or blades of grass
to wave in the wind. But he was able to restrain himself from trying

to control the creative process. It was at Pixar that he learned to let
othercreative people flourish and take the lead. Largely it was because
426

Pixar's Friends

427

he loved Lasseter, a gentle artist who, like Ive, brought out the best
in Jobs.

Jobs's main role at Pixarwas deal making, in which his natural in
tensitywas an asset. Soonafterthe release of Toy Story, he clashed with
Jeffrey Katzenberg, who had left Disney in the summer of 1994 and
joined with Steven Spielberg and David Geffen to start DreamWorks
SKG. Jobs believed that his Pixar teamhad told Katzenberg, while he
was still at Disney, about its proposed second movie, A Bugs Life, and
that he had then stolen the idea of an animated insect movie when

he decided to produce Antz at DreamWorks. "When Jeffrey was still
running Disney animation, we pitched him onA Bugs Life," Jobs said.
"In sixty years of animation history, nobody had thought of doing an
animated movie about insects, until Lasseter. It was one of his brilliant

creative sparks. And Jeffrey left and went to DreamWorks and all of
a sudden had this idea for an animated movie about—Oh!—insects.

Andhepretended he'd never heard thepitch. He lied. He lied through
his teeth."

Actually, not. The real story is a bit more interesting. Katzenberg
never heard the Bugs Life pitch while at Disney. But after he left for

DreamWorks, he stayed in touch with Lasseter, occasionally pinging
him with one of his typical "Hey buddy, how you doing just check
ing in" quick phone calls. So when Lasseter happened to be at the
Technicolor facility on the Universal lot, where DreamWorks was also

located, he called Katzenberg and dropped by with a couple of col
leagues. When Katzenberg asked what they were doing next, Lasseter
told him. "We described to him A Bugs Life, with an ant as the main
character, and told him the whole story of him organizing the other
ants and enlisting a group of circus performer insects to fight off the
grasshoppers," Lasseter recalled. "I should have been wary. Jeffrey kept
asking questions about when it would be released."

Lasseter began to get worried when, in early 1996, he heard ru
mors that DreamWorks might be making its own computer-animated
movie about ants. He called Katzenberg and asked him point-blank.
Katzenberg hemmed, hawed, and asked where Lasseter had heard
that. Lasseter asked again, and Katzenberg admitted it was true. "How
could you?" yelled Lasseter, who very rarely raised hisvoice.

428

Walter Isaacson

"We had the idea long ago," said Katzenberg, who explained that it
had been pitched to him by a development director at DreamWorks.
"I don't believe you," Lasseterreplied.
Katzenberg conceded that he had sped up Antz as a way to coun
ter his former colleagues at Disney. DreamWorks' first major picture
was to be Prince of Egypt, which was scheduled to be released for
Thanksgiving 1998, and he was appalled when he heard that Disney
was planning to release Pixar's A Bugs Life that same weekend. So he
had rushedAntzinto production to force Disneyto change the release
date ofA Bugs Life.
"Fuckyou," replied Lasseter, who did not normally use such lan
guage. He didn't speak to Katzenberg for another thirteen years.
Jobs was furious, and he was far more practiced than Lasseter at
giving vent to his emotions. He called Katzenberg and started yell

ing. Katzenberg made an offer: He would delay production ofAntz if
Jobs and Disney would move ABugs Life sothat it didn'tcompete with
Prince ofEgypt. "It was a blatant extortion attempt, and I didn't go for
it,"Jobs recalled. He told Katzenberg therewasnothing he coulddo to
make Disney change the release date.
"Of course you can," Katzenberg replied. "You can move moun
tains. You taught me how!" He said that whenPixar was almost bank
rupt, he had come to its rescue by giving it the deal to do Toy Story.
"I was the one guy there for you back then, and nowyou're allowing
them to use you to screw me." He suggested that if Jobs wanted to,
he could simply slow down production onA Bugs Life without telling
Disney. If he did, Katzenberg said, hewould put Antz on hold. "Don't
evengo there," Jobs replied.
Katzenberg had a valid gripe. It was clear that Eisner and Disney
were using the Pixar movie to get back at him for leaving Disney and
starting a rival animation studio."Prince ofEgypt was the first thingwe
were making, andtheyscheduled something forourannounced release
date just to be hostile," he said. "My view was like that of the Lion
King, that ifyou stick your hand in my cage andpaw me, watch out."
No one backed down, and the rival ant movies provoked a press

frenzy. Disney tried to keep Jobs quiet, on the theory that playing up

Pixar s Friends

429

the rivalrywould serve to helpAntz,but he was a man not easily muz
zled. "The bad guys rarely win," he told the Los Angeles Times. In re
sponse, DreamWorks' savvy marketing maven, Terry Press, suggested,
"SteveJobs should take a pill."
Antz was released at the beginning of October 1998. It was not a
bad movie. Woody Allen voiced the part of a neurotic ant living in a
conformist society who yearns to express his individualism. "This is the
kind of Woody Allen comedyWoody Allen no longer makes," Time
wrote. It grossed a respectable $91 million domestically and $172 mil
lion worldwide.

A Bug's Life came out sixweeks later, as planned. It had a more epic
plot, which reversed Aesop's tale of "The Ant and the Grasshopper,"
plus a greater technicalvirtuosity, which allowed such startling details
as the view of grass from a bug's vantage point. Time was much more
effusive about it. "Its design work is so stellar—a wide-screen Eden
of leaves and labyrinths populated by dozens of ugly, buggy, cuddly
cutups—that it makes the DreamWorks film seem, bycomparison, like
radio," wrote Richard Corliss. It did twice as well as Antz at the box of

fice, grossing $163 million domestically and $363 million worldwide.
(It also beatPrince ofEgypt.)
A few years later Katzenberg ran into Jobs and tried to smooth
things over. He insisted that he had never heard the pitch forA Bugs
Life while at Disney; if he had, his settlement with Disney would
have given him a share of the profits, so it's not something he would
lie about. Jobs laughed, and accepted as much. "I asked you to move
your release date, and you wouldn't, so you can't be mad at me for
protecting my child," Katzenberg told him. He recalled that Jobs "got
really calm and Zen-like" and said he understood. But Jobs later said
that he never really forgave Katzenberg:
Our film toasted his at the box office. Did that feel good? No, it still
felt awful, because people started saying how everyone in Hollywood
was doing insect movies. He took the brilliant originality away from
John, and that can never be replaced. That's unconscionable, so IVe
never trusted him,even after he tried to make amends. He came up to

430

Walter Isaacson

me after he was successful with Shrek and said,Tm a changed man, Fm
finallyat peace with myself," and all this crap.And it was like, give me
a break,Jeffrey.

For his part, Katzenberg was much more gracious. He considered
Jobs one of the "true geniuses in the world," and he learned to respect
him despite their volatile dealings.
More important than beatingAntzwasshowing that Pixarwas not
a one-hit wonder. A Bug's Life grossed as much as Toy Story had, prov
ing that the first success was not a fluke. "There's a classic thing in busi
ness, which is the second-product syndrome," Jobs later said. It comes
from not understanding what made your first product so successful.
"I lived through that at Apple. My feeling was, if we got through our
second film, we'd make it."

Steve's Own Movie

Toy Story 2, which came out in November 1999, was even bigger, with
a $485 million gross worldwide. Given that Pixar's success was now
assured, it was time to start building a showcase headquarters. Jobs and
the Pixar facilities team found an abandoned Del Monte fruit cannery

in Emeryville, an industrial neighborhood between Berkeley and Oak
land, just across the Bay Bridge from SanFrancisco. Theytoreit down,
andJobs commissioned Peter Bohlin, the architectof the Apple stores,
to design a newbuilding for the sixteen-acre plot.
Jobs obsessed over every aspect of the newbuilding, from the over
all concept to the tiniest detail regarding materials and construction.
"Steve had this firm beliefthat the right kind of buildingcan do great
things for a culture," said Pixar's president Ed Catmull. Jobs controlled
the creation of the building asif hewere a director sweating each scene
of a film. "The Pixar building was Steve's own movie," Lasseter said.
Lasseter hadoriginallywanted atraditional Hollywood studio, with
separate buildings forvarious projects andbungalows for development
teams. But the Disney folks said theydidn'tliketheir newcampus be
cause the teams felt isolated, andJobs agreed. In fact he decided they

Pixar's Friends

431

should go to the other extreme: one huge building around a central
atrium designed to encourage random encounters.
Despite being a denizen of the digital world, or maybe because he
knew all too well its isolating potential,Jobs was a strong believer in

face-to-face meetings. "There's a temptation in our networked age to
think that ideas can be developed by emailand iChat," he said."That's
crazy. Creativity comes from spontaneous meetings,from random dis
cussions. You run into someone, you ask what they're doing, you say
'Wow,'and soon you're cooking up all sorts of ideas."
So he had the Pixar building designed to promote encounters and
unplanned collaborations. "If a building doesn't encourage that, you'll
losea lot of innovation and the magic that's sparked by serendipity," he
said. "So we designed the building to make people get out of their of
fices and mingle in the centralatriumwith people they might not oth
erwise see." The front doors and main stairs and corridors all led to the

atrium, the cafe and the mailboxes were there, the conference rooms
had windows that looked out onto it, and the six-hundred-seat the

ater and two smaller screening rooms allspilled into it. "Steve's theory
worked from dayone," Lasseter recalled. "I kept running into people I
hadn't seen for months. I've never seen a building that promoted col
laboration and creativity as well as this one."

Jobseven went sofar asto decree that therebe onlytwo hugebath
rooms in the building, one for each gender, connected to the atrium.
"He felt that very, very strongly," recalled Pam Kerwin, Pixar's general
manager. "Some ofus feltthat was going too far. One pregnant woman
said she shouldn't be forced to walk for ten minutes just to go to the
bathroom, and that led to a bigfight." It was one of the fewtimes that
Lasseter disagreed withJobs. Theyreached a compromise: therewould
be two sets of bathrooms on either side of the atrium on both of the
two floors.

Because the building's steel beams were going to be visible, Jobs
pored over samples from manufacturers across the country to see which
had the best color and texture. He chose a mill in Arkansas, told it to
blast the steel to a pure color, and made sure the truckers used cau
tion not to nick any of it. He also insisted that all the beams be bolted
together, not welded."We sandblasted the steel and clear-coated it, so

432

Walter Isaacson

you can actually see what it's like," he recalled. "When the steelworkers were putting up the beams, they would bring their families on the
weekend to show them."

The wackiest piece of serendipity was "The Love Lounge." One of
the animators found a small door on the back wall when he moved into

his office. It opened to a low corridor that you could crawl through to
a room clad in sheetmetalthat provided access to the air-conditioning
valves. He and his colleagues commandeered the secret room, fes
tooned it with Christmas lights and lava lamps, and furnished it with
benchesupholstered in animal prints, tasseled pillows, a fold-up cock
tail table, liquor bottles, bar equipment, and napkins that read "The
Love Lounge." A video camera installed in the corridor allowed oc
cupants to monitor who might be approaching.
Lasseter and Jobs brought importantvisitors there and had them
signthe wall. The signatures include Michael Eisner, Roy Disney, Tim
Allen, and Randy Newman. Jobs loved it, but since he wasn't a drinker
he sometimes referred to it as the Meditation Room. It reminded him,
he said, ofthe one that he and Daniel Kottke had at Reed, but without
the acid.

The Divorce

In testimony before a Senate committee in February 2002, Michael
Eisner blasted the ads thatJobs had created for Apple'siTunes. "There
are computer companies that have full-page ads and billboards that
say: Rip, mix, burn," he declared. "In other words, they can create a
theft and distribute it to all their friends if they buy this particular
computer."
This was not a smart comment. It misunderstood the meaning of
"rip" and assumed it involved ripping someone off, rather thanimport
ing files from a CD to a computer. More significantly, it truly pissed
offJobs, as Eisner should have known. That too was not smart. Pixar
hadrecently released the fourth moviein its Disneydeal, Monsters, Inc.,
which turned out to be the most successful ofthem all, with $525 mil-

Pixar s Friends

433

lion in worldwide gross. Disney's Pixar deal was again coming up for
renewal, and Eisner had not made it easier by publicly poking a stick at
his partner's eye. Jobs was so incredulous he called a Disney executive
to vent: "Do you knowwhat Michael just did to me?"
Eisner and Jobs came from different backgrounds and opposite
coasts, but theywere similar in beingstrong-willed and without much
inclination to find compromises. They both had a passion for making
goodproducts, whichoften meant micromanaging details and not sugarcoating their criticisms. WatchingEisnertake repeated rides on the
Wildlife Express train through DisneyWorld's Animal Kingdom and
coming up with smart ways to improve the customer experience was
like watchingJobs playwith the interface of an iPod and find ways it
couldbe simplified. Watching them manage peoplewas a less edifying
experience.
Both were better at pushing people than being pushed, which led
to an unpleasant atmosphere when they started trying to do it to each
other. In a disagreement, they tended to assert that the other party
was lying. In addition, neither Eisner nor Jobs seemed to believe that
he could learn anything from the other; nor would it have occurred to
either even to fake a bit of deference by pretending to have anything
to learn.Jobs put the onus on Eisner:
The worstthing,to mymind,was that Pixarhad successfully reinvented
Disney'sbusiness, turning out great films one after the other while Dis
ney turned out flop after flop. You would think the CEO of Disney
would be curious howPixar was doing that.But duringthe twenty-year
relationship, he visited Pixar for a total of about two and a half hours,
onlyto give little congratulatory speeches. He was nevercurious. I was
amazed. Curiosityis veryimportant.

That was overly harsh. Eisner had been up to Pixar a bit more than
that, including visits when Jobs wasn't with him. But it was true that
he showed littlecuriosity aboutthe artistry or technology at the studio.

Jobs likewise didn't spend much time trying to learn from Disney's
management.

434

Walter Isaacson

The open sniping between Jobs and Eisner began in the summer
of2002. Jobs had always admired the creative spirit of the great Walt
Disney, especially because he had nurtured a company to last for gen
erations. He viewed Walt's nephew Roy as an embodiment of this his
toric legacy and spirit. Roy was still on the Disney board, despite his
own growing estrangement from Eisner, and Jobs let him know that

he would not renew the Pixar-Disney deal as long as Eisner was still
the CEO.

Roy Disney and Stanley Gold, his close associate on the Disney
board, began warning other directors about the Pixar problem. That
prompted Eisner to send the board an intemperate email in late Au
gust 2002. He was confident that Pixar would eventually renew its
deal, he said, partlybecause Disney had rights to the Pixarmovies and
characters that had been made thus far. Plus,he said, Disneywould be
in a better negotiating position in a year, after Pixar finished Finding
Nemo. "Yesterday we saw for the second time the new Pixar movie,
Finding Nemo, that comes out nextMay," he wrote. "This willbe a re
ality check for those guys. It's okay, but nowhere near as good as their
previous films. Of course they think it is great." There were two major
problems with this email: It leaked to the LosAngeles Times, provoking
Jobs to go ballistic, and Eisner's assessment of the movie was wrong,
very wrong.

Finding Nemo became Pixar's (andDisney's) biggest hit thus far. It
easily beat out The Lion King to become, for the time being, the most
successful animated movie in history. It grossed $340 million domes
tically and $868 million worldwide. Until 2010 it was also the most
popular DVD of all time, with forty million copies sold, and spawned
some of the most popular rides at Disney theme parks. In addition, it
was a richly textured, subde, and deeplybeautifiil artistic achievement
that won the Oscar for best animated feature. "I liked the film because

it was about taking risks and learningto let those you love take risks,"
Jobs said. Its success added $183 million to Pixar's cash reserves, giv
ing it a hefty war chest of $521 million for the final showdown with
Disney.
Shordy after Finding Nemo was finished, Jobs made Eisner an offer

Pixar's Friends

435

that was so one-sided it was clearly meant to be rejected. Instead of a

fifty-fifty split on revenues, as in theexisting deal, Jobs proposed a new
arrangement in which Pixar would own outright the films it made and
the characters in them, and it would merely pay Disney a 7.5% fee to
distribute the movies. Plus, the last two films under the existingdeal—
The Incredibles and Cars were the ones in the works—would shift to the
new distribution deal.

Eisner, however, held onepowerful trump card. Evenif Pixardidn't
renew, Disney had the right to make sequels of Toy Story and the other
movies that Pixar had made, and it owned all the characters, from

Woody to Nemo,just as it owned MickeyMouse and Donald Duck.
Eisner was already planning—or threatening—to have Disney's own
animation studio do a Toy Story 3, which Pixar had declined to do.
"When you see what that company did putting out Cinderella II, you
shudder at what would have happened," Jobs said.
Eisner was able to force Roy Disney off the board in November
2003, but that didn't end the turmoil. Disney released a scathing open
letter. "The company has lost its focus, its creative energy, and its her
itage," he wrote. His litany of Eisner's alleged failings included not
building a constructive relationship with Pixar. By this point Jobs had
decided that he no longer wanted to work with Eisner. So in January
2004 he publicly announced that he was cutting off negotiations with
Disney.
Jobs was usually disciplined in not makingpublic the strong opin
ions that he shared with friends around his Palo Alto kitchen table.

But this time he did not hold back. In a conference callwith reporters,
he said that while Pixar was producing hits, Disney animation was
making "embarrassing duds." He scoffed at Eisner's notion that Dis
ney made any creative contribution to the Pixar films: "The truth is
there has been little creative collaboration with Disney for years. You
can compare the creative quality of our films with the creative quality
of Disney's last three films and judge each company's creative ability
yourselves." In addition to building a better creative team, Jobs had
pulled off the remarkable feat of buildinga brand that was now as big
a draw for moviegoers as Disney's. "We think the Pixar brand is now

436

Walter Isaacson

the most powerful and trustedbrand in animation." When Jobs called
to give him a heads-up, Roy Disney replied, "When the wicked witch
is dead, we'll be togetheragain."
John Lasseter was aghast at the prospect of breaking up with Dis
ney. "I was worried about my children, what they would do with the
characters we'd created," he recalled. "It was like a dagger to myheart."
When he told his top staff in the Pixar conference room, he started
crying, and he did so again when he addressed the eight hundred or
so Pixar employees gathered in the studio's atrium."It's like you have
these dear children and you have to give them up to be adopted by
convicted child molesters." Jobs came to the atrium stage next and
tried to calm things down. He explained why it might be necessary to
breakwith Disney, and he assured them that Pixar as an institution had
to keep looking forward to be successfiil. "He has the absolute ability
to make you believe," said Oren Jacob, a longtime technologist at the
studio."Suddenly, we all had the confidence that, whatever happened,
Pixar would flourish."

Bob Iger, Disney's chief operating officer, had to step in and do
damagecontrol.He was as sensible and solidas those around him were
volatile. His background wasin television; he had been presidentof the
ABC Network, whichwas acquired in 1996by Disney. His reputation
was as a corporate suit, and he excelled at deft management, but he
also had a sharp eye for talent, a good-humored ability to understand
people, and a quiet flair that he was secure enough to keep muted.Un
like Eisner andJobs, he had a disciplined calm, which helped him deal
with large egos. "Steve did some grandstanding by announcing that
he was ending talks with us," Iger later recalled. "We went into crisis
mode, and I developed sometalkingpoints to settle things down."
Eisner had presided over ten great years at Disney, when Frank
Wells served as his president. Wells freed Eisner from many manage
ment duties so he could make his suggestions, usually valuable and
often brilliant, on ways to improve each movie project, theme park
ride, television pilot, and countless other products. But after Wells
was killed in a helicopter crash in 1994, Eisner neverfound the right
manager. Katzenberg had demanded Wells's job, which is why Eisner
ousted him. Michael Ovitz became president in 1995; it was not a

Pixar's Friends

437

pretty sight, and he was gone in less than two years. Jobs later offered
his assessment:

For his first ten years as CEO, Eisner did a really goodjob. For the last
ten years, he really did a bad job. And the change came when Frank
Wells died. Eisner is a really good creative guy. He gives really good
notes. So when Frank was running operations, Eisner could be like a
bumblebee going from project to project trying to make them better.
But when Eisner had to run things, he was a terrible manager. Nobody
liked working for him. They felt they had no authority. He had this
strategic planning group that was like the Gestapo, in that youcouldn't
spend any money, not even a dime, without them approving it. Even
though I broke with him,I had to respect his achievements in the first
ten years. And therewas a part of him I actually liked. He s a fun guy
to be around at times—smart, witty. But he had a dark side to him. His
ego got the better of him. Eisner was reasonable and fair to me at first,
but eventually, over the course of dealing with him for a decade, I came
to see a dark side to him.

Eisner's biggest problem in 2004 was that he did not fully fathom
how messed up his animation division was. Its two most recent mov
ies, Treasure Planetand Brother Bear, did no honor to the Disney leg

acy, or to its balance sheets. Hit animation movies were the lifeblood
of the company; they spawned theme park rides, toys, and television
shows. Toy Story had led to a movie sequel, a Disney on Ice show, a
Toy Story Musical performed on Disney cruise ships, a direct-to-video
film featuring BuzzLightyear, a computer storybook, twovideo games,
a dozen action toys that soldtwenty-five million units, a clothing line,
and nine different attractions at Disney theme parks.This was not the
case for Treasure Planet

"Michael didn't understand that Disney's problems in animation
were as acute as they were," Iger later explained. "That manifested it
self in the way he dealt with Pixar. He never felt he needed Pixar as
much as he really did."In addition, Eisnerloved to negotiate and hated
to compromise, whichwasnot always the best combination when deal
ing with Jobs, who was the same way. "Everynegotiation needs to be

438

Walter Isaacson

resolved by compromises," Iger said. "Neither one of them is a master
of compromise."
The impasse was endedon a Saturday night in March 2005, when
Iger got a phone call from former senator George Mitchell and other
Disney board members. They told him that, startingin a few months,
he wouldreplace Eisner as Disney's CEO. When Iger got up the next
morning, he called his daughters and then SteveJobs and John Las
seter. He said,verysimplyand clearly, that he valuedPixar and wanted
to make a deal. Jobs was thrilled. He liked Iger and even marveled at
a small connection they had: his former girlfriend Jennifer Egan and
Iger's wife, Willow Bay, had been roommates at Penn.

That summer, before Iger officially took over, he andJobs got to
have a trial run at making a deal. Applewas coming out with an iPod
that would play video as well as music. It needed television shows to

sell, and Jobs did not want to be too public in negotiating for them
because, as usual, he wanted the productto be secret until he unveiled
it onstage. Iger, whohad multiple iPods andused them throughout the
day, from his 5 a.m. workouts to late at night, had already been envi
sioning what it could do for television shows. So he immediately of
fered ABC's most popular shows, Desperate Housewives and Lost. "We
negotiated that deal in a week, and it was complicated," Iger said. "It
was important because Steve got to see how I worked, and because it
showedeveryone that Disney couldin fact work with Steve."
For the announcement of the video iPod, Jobs rented a theater in
SanJose, and he invited Iger to be his surprise guest onstage. "I had
never been to one of his announcements, so I had no ideawhat a big
dealit was," Iger recalled. "It was a realbreakthrough for our relation
ship. He saw I was pro-technologyand willing to take risks." Jobs did
his usual virtuoso performance, running through all the features of the
new iPod,how it was"one of the best thingswe've everdone," and how
the iTunes Store would now be selling music videos and short films.
Then, as was his habit, he ended with "And yes, there is one more
thing:" The iPodwould be selling TV shows. Therewas huge applause.
He mentioned that the two most popular shows were on ABC. "And
who owns ABC? Disney! I knowtheseguys," he exulted.
When Iger then cameonstage, he lookedas relaxed and as comfort-

Pixar's Friends

439

able asJobs."One of the things that Steve and I are incredibly excited
about is the intersection between great content and great technology,"
he said. "It's great to be here to announce an extension of our relation
with Apple," he added. Then, afterthe properpause, he said,"Not with
Pixar,but with Apple."
But it was clear from their warm embracethat a new Pixar-Disney
deal was once again possible. "It signaled my wayof operating, which
was'Make love not war,'" Iger recalled. "We had been at war with Roy
Disney, Comcast, Apple, and Pixar. I wanted to fix all that, Pixar most
of all."

Iger had just comeback from openingthe new Disneylandin Hong
Kong, with Eisner at his side in his last big act as CEO. The ceremo
niesincluded the usualDisneyparadedownMain Street.Iger realized
that the only characters in the paradethat had been createdin the past
decade were Pixar's. "A lightbulb went off," he recalled. "Fm stand
ing next to Michael, but I kept it completely to myself, because it was
suchan indictment of his stewardship of animation during that period.
After ten years of The Lion King, Beauty and the Beast, and Aladdin,
there were then ten years of nothing."
Iger went back to Burbank and had some financial analysis done.
He discovered that they had actually lost money on animation in the
past decade and had produced little that helped ancillary products. At
his first meeting as the new CEO, he presented the analysis to the
board,whose membersexpressed someanger that they had never been
told this. "As animationgoes, so goes our company," he told the board.
"A hit animated film is a big wave, and the ripples go down to every
part of our business—from characters in a parade, to music, to parks,
to video games, TV, Internet, consumer products. If I don't havewave
makers, the company is not goingto succeed." He presentedthem with
some choices. They could stick with the current animation manage
ment, which he didn't think would work. They could get rid of man
agement and find someone else, but he said he didn't know who that
would be. Or they could buy Pixar. "The problemis,I don't know if it's
for sale, and if it is, it's going to be a huge amount of money," he said.
The board authorized him to explore a deal.
Iger went about it in an unusualway. When he first talked to Jobs,

440

Walter Isaacson

he admitted the revelation that had occurred to him in Hong Kong
and how it convinced him that Disney badly needed Pixar. "That's
why I just loved Bob Iger," recalled Jobs. "He just blurted it out. Now
that's the dumbest thingyou can do as you entera negotiation, at least
according to the traditional rulebook. He just put his cards out on the
table and said, 'We're screwed.' I immediately liked the guy, because
that's how I worked too. Let's just immediately put all the cards on
the table and see where they fall." (In fact that was not usually Jobs's
mode of operation. He often began negotiations by proclaiming that
the other company's products or services sucked.)
Jobs and Iger took a lot of walks—around the Apple campus, in
Palo Alto, at theAllen andCo. retreat in SunValley. At first theycame
up with a planfor a newdistribution deal: Pixar would get backallthe
rights to the movies and characters it had already produced in return

forDisney's getting an equity stake in Pixar, andit would pay Disney a
simple fee to distribute its future movies. But Iger worried that such a
deal would simply set Pixar up asa competitor to Disney, which would
bebadeven if Disney had an equity stake in it. Sohe began to hint that
maybe they should actually do something bigger. "I want you to know
that I am really thinking out of the box on this,"he said. Jobs seemed
to encourage the advances. "It wasn't too long before it was clear to
both of us that this discussion mightleadto an acquisition discussion,"
Jobs recalled.

But firstJobs needed the blessing ofJohn Lasseter and Ed Catmull,
so he asked them to come over to his house. He got right to the point.
"We need to get to know Bob Iger," he told them. "We maywant to
throw in with him and to help him remake Disney. He's a great guy."
They were skeptical at first. "He could tell we were pretty shocked,"
Lasseter recalled.

"If youguys don'twant to do it, that's fine, but I want you to get to
know Iger before you decide," Jobs continued. "I was feeling the same
as you, but I've reallygrown to like the guy." He explained how easyit
had been to make the dealto put ABC shows on the iPod, and added,
"It's night and day different from Eisner's Disney. He's straightfor
ward, and there's no drama with him." Lasseter remembers that he and

Catmull just sat there with their mouths slightlyopen.

Pixar's Friends

441

Iger went to work. He flew from Los Angeles to Lasseter's house
for dinner, and stayed up well past midnight talking. He also took Cat
mull out to dinner, and then he visited Pixar Studios, alone, with no

entourage and without Jobs. "Iwent out and met all the directors one
on one, and they each pitched me their movie," he said. Lasseter was

proud ofhow much his team impressed Iger, which ofcourse made
him warm up to Iger. "I never had more pride inPixar than that day,"
he said. "All the teams and pitches were amazing, and Bob was blown
away."

Indeed after seeing what was coming up over the next few years—
Cars, Ratatouille, WALL-E—lgex told his chieffinancial officer at Dis

ney, "Oh my God, they've got great stuff. We've got to get this deal
done. It'sthefuture ofthecompany." He admitted thathehad nofaith
in the movies that Disney animation had in the works.

The deal they proposed was that Disney would purchase Pixar for
$7.4 billion in stock. Jobs would thus become Disney's largest share

holder, with approximately 7% of the company's stock compared to
1.7% owned by Eisner and 1% by Roy Disney. Disney Animation
would be put under Pixar, with Lasseter and Catmull running the
combined unit. Pixar would retain its independent identity, its studio

and headquarters would remain in Emeryville, and it would even keep
its own email addresses.

Iger asked Jobs to bring Lasseter and Catmull to a secret meeting
ofthe Disney board in Century City, Los Angeles, on a Sunday morn

ing. Thegoal was tomake them feel comfortable with what would be a
radical and expensive deal. As they prepared to take the elevator from
the parking garage, Lasseter said toJobs, "IfI start getting too excited
or go on too long, just touch my leg." Jobs ended up having to do it
once, but otherwise Lasseter made the perfect sales pitch. "I talked
about how we make films, what our philosophies are, the honesty we
have with each other, and how we nurture the creative talent," he re
called. The board asked a lot of questions, andJobs let Lasseter answer
most. But Jobs did talk about howexciting it was to connect art with

technology. "That's what our culture is all about, just like at Apple,"
he said.

Before the Disney board got a chance to approve the merger, how-

442

Walter Isaacson

ever, Michael Eisner arose from the departed to try to derail it. He
called Iger and said it was far too expensive. "You can fix animation

yourself," Eisner told him. "How?" asked Iger. "I know you can," said
Eisner. Iger got abit annoyed. "Michael, how come you say I can fix it,
when you couldn't fix it yourself?" he asked.

Eisner said he wanted to come to aboard meeting, even though he
was no longer a member or an officer, and speak against the acquisi
tion. Iger resisted, but Eisner called Warren Buffett, abig shareholder,
and George Mitchell, who was the lead director. The former senator

convinced Iger to let Eisner have his say. "I told the board that they
didn't need tobuy Pixar because they already owned 85% ofthe movies
Pixar had already made," Eisner recounted. He was referring to the fact
that for the movies already made, Disney was getting that percentage
ofthe gross, plus it had the rights to make all the sequels and exploit
thecharacters. "I made a presentation thatsaid, here's the 15% ofPixar

that Disney does not already own. So that's what you're getting. The
rest is a bet on future Pixar films." Eisner admitted that Pixar had been

enjoying a good run, but he said it could not continue. "I showed the
history of producers and directors who had X number of hits in a row

and then failed. It happened to Spielberg, Walt Disney, all ofthem."
To make the deal worthit, he calculated, each newPixar movie would

have to gross $1.3 billion. "It drove Steve crazy thatI knew that," Eis
ner later said.

After he left the room, Iger refuted his argument point by point.
"Let me tell you what was wrong with that presentation," he began.
When the board had finished hearing them both, it approved the deal
Iger proposed.

Iger flew up to Emeryville to meet Jobs and jointly announce the
deal to the Pixar workers. But before they did, Jobs sat down alone
with Lasseter and Catmull. "Ifeither ofyou have doubts," he said, "I
will just tell them no thanks and blow off this deal." He wasn't totally
sincere. It would have been almost impossible to do so at that point.
Butit was a welcome gesture. "I'm good," said Lasseter. "Let's do it."
Catmull agreed. They all hugged, and Jobs wept.
Everyone then gathered in the atrium. "Disney is buying Pixar,"
Jobs announced. There were a few tears, butas he explained the deal,

Pixar s Friends

443

the staffers began to realize that in some ways it was a reverse acqui
sition. Catmull would be the head of Disney animation, Lasseter its

chief creative officer. By the end they were cheering. Iger had been

standing on the side, and Jobs invited him to center stage. As he talked
about the special culture ofPixar and how badly Disney needed to
nurture it and learn from it, the crowd broke into applause.

"My goal has always been not only to make great products, but to
build great companies,"Jobs later said. "Walt Disney did that. And the
way we did the merger, we kept Pixar as agreat company and helped
Disney remain one as well."

CHAPTER

THIRTY-FOUR

TWENTY-FIRST-CENTURY MACS
Setting Apple Apart

With the iBook, 1999

ClamSy Ice Cubesy and Sunflowers
Ever since theintroduction ofthe iMac in 1998,Jobs and Jony Ive had
made beguiling design a signature ofApple's computers. There was a
consumer laptop that looked like a tangerine clam, and a professional
desktop computer that suggested a Zen ice cube. Like bell-bottoms
that turn up in the back of a closet, someof these modelslooked better
at the time than they do in retrospect, and they show a love of design

thatwas, onoccasion, abittoo exuberant. Butthey setApple apart and
provided the publicity bursts it neededto survive in a Windows world.
444

Twenty-first-century Macs

445

The Power Mac G4 Cube, released in 2000, was so alluring that

one ended up on display in New York's Museum ofModern Art. An
eight-inch perfect cube the size ofa Kleenex box, it was the pure ex
pression ofJobs's aesthetic. The sophistication came from minimalism.
No buttons marred the surface. There was no CD tray, just a subtle

slot. And as with the original Macintosh, there was no fan. Pure Zen.

"When you see something that's so thoughtful on the outside you
say, 'Oh, wow, it must be really thoughtful on the inside,'" he told
Newsweek "We make progress by eliminating things, by removing the
superfluous."
The G4 Cube was almost ostentatious in its lack of ostentation,

and it was powerful. But it was not a success. It had been designed as
a high-end desktop, but Jobs wanted to turn it, as he did almost every
product, into something that could be mass-marketed to consumers.
The Cube ended up notserving either market well. Workaday profes
sionals weren't seeking ajewel-like sculpture for their desks, andmassmarket consumers were not eager to spend twice what they'd pay for
a plain vanilla desktop. Jobs predicted that Apple would sell 200,000
Cubes per quarter. In its first quarter it sold halfthat. The next quarter
it sold fewer than thirty thousand units. Jobs later admitted that he
had overdesigned and overpriced the Cube, just as he had the NeXT
computer. But gradually he was learning his lesson. In building devices
likethe iPod, he would controlcosts and makethe trade-offs necessary

to get them launched on time and on budget.
Partly because ofthepoor sales oftheCube, Apple produced disap
pointing revenue numbers in September 2000. Thatwas justwhen the
tech bubble was deflating and Apple's education market was declining.
The company's stock price, which had been above $60, fell 50% in one
day, and by early December it was below $15.
None of this deterred Jobs from continuing to push for distinc

tive, even distracting, new design. When flat-screen displays became
commercially viable, he decided it was time to replace the iMac, the
translucent consumer desktop computer that looked as if it were from
zjetsons cartoon. Ive came up with a model that was somewhat con
ventional, with the guts of the computer attached to the back of the
flat screen. Jobs didn't like it. As he often did, both at Pixar and at

446

Walter Isaacson

Apple, he slammed on the brakes to rethink things. There was some
thing about the design that lacked purity, he felt. "Why have this flat
display if you're going to glom all this stuffon its back?" he asked Ive.
"We should let each element be true to itself."

Jobs went home early that day to mull over the problem, then called
Ive to come by. They wandered into the garden, which Jobs's wife had

planted with a profusion of sunflowers. "Every year I do something
wild with the garden, and that time it involved masses of sunflow

ers, with a sunflower house for the kids," she recalled. "Jony and Steve
were riffing on their design problem, then Jony asked, 'What if the
screen was separated from the base like a sunflower?' He got excited
and started sketching." Ive liked his designs to suggest a narrative, and
he realized that a sunflower shape would convey that the flat screen
was so fluid and responsive that it could reachfor the sun.
In Ives new design, the Mac's screen was attached to a movable

chrome neck, so that it looked not only like a sunflower but also like
a cheeky Luxo lamp. Indeed it evoked the playful personality ofLuxo

Jr. in the first short film that John Lasseter had made at Pixar. Apple
took outmany patents for the design, most crediting Ive, butonone of
them, for "a computer system having a movable assembly attached to a
flat panel display," Jobs listed himself as the primary inventor.
In hindsight, some of Apple's Macintosh designs may seem a bit
too cute. But other computer makers were at the other extreme. It was
an industry that you'd expect to be innovative, but instead it was dom
inated by cheaply designed generic boxes. After a few ill-conceived

stabs atpainting on blue colors and trying new shapes, companies such
as Dell, Compaq, and HP commoditized computers by outsourcing
manufacturing and competing on price. With its spunky designs and
itspathbreaking applications like iTunes and iMovie, Apple was about
the only place innovating.

Intel Inside

Apple's innovations were more than skin-deep. Since 1994 it hadbeen
using a microprocessor, called the PowerPC, that was made bya part-

Twenty-first-century Macs

447

nership ofIBM and Motorola. For a few years it was faster than In
tel's chips, an advantage that Apple touted in humorous commercials.
By the time ofJobs's return, however, Motorola had fallen behind in
producing new versions of the chip. This provoked a fight between
Jobs and Motorola's CEO Chris Galvin. When Jobs decided to stop
licensing the Macintosh operating system to clone makers, right after
his return to Apple in 1997, he suggested to Galvin that he might
consider making an exception for Motorola's clone, the StarMax Mac,
but only ifMotorola sped up development ofnew PowerPC chips for
laptops. The call got heated. Jobs offered his opinion that Motorola
chips sucked. Galvin, who also had a temper, pushed back. Jobs hung
up on him. The Motorola StarMax was canceled, and Jobs secretly
began planning to move Apple offthe Motorola-IBM PowerPC chip
and to adopt, instead, Intel's. This would notbe a simple task. It was
akin to writing a new operating system.

Jobs did not cede any real power to his board, but he did use its
meetings to kick around ideas and think through strategies in con
fidence, while he stood at a whiteboard and led freewheeling discus

sions. For eighteen months the directors discussed whether to move
to an Intel architecture. "We debated it, we asked a lot of questions,

and finally we all decided it needed to be done," board member Art
Levinson recalled.

Paul Otellini, who was then president and later became CEO of

Intel, began huddling with Jobs. They had gotten to know each other
when Jobs was struggling to keep NeXT alive and, as Otellini later put
it,"his arrogance had been temporarily tempered." Otellini has a calm
and wry take onpeople, and he was amused rather than putoffwhen
he discovered, upon dealing with Jobs at Apple in the early 2000s,
"that his juices were going again, and he wasn't nearly as humble any
more." Intel had deals with other computer makers, andJobs wanted
a better price than they had. "We had to find creative ways to bridge
the numbers," saidOtellini. Most of the negotiating was done, asJobs

preferred, onlong walks, sometimes on the trails up to the radio tele
scope known as theDish above the Stanford campus. Jobs would start
the walk by telling a story and explaining how he saw the history of
computers evolving. Bythe endhewould be haggling over price.

448

Walter Isaacson

"Intel had areputation for being atough partner, coming out ofthe
days when it was run by Andy Grove and Craig Barrett," Otellini said.
"Iwanted to show thatIntel was a company you could work with." So
a crack team from Intel worked with Apple, and they were able to beat

the conversion deadline by six months. Jobs invited Otellini to Apple's
Top 100 management retreat, where he donned one ofthe famous Intel

lab coats that looked like abunny suit and gave Jobs a big hug. At the
public announcement in 2005, the usually reserved Otellini repeated
the act. "Apple and Intel, together atlast," flashed on the big screen.
Bill Gates was amazed. Designing crazy-colored cases did not im

press him, but asecret program toswitch the CPU inacomputer, com
pleted seamlessly and on time, was a feat he truly admired. "Ifyou'd
said, 'Okay, we're going to change our microprocessor chip, and we're
not going to lose a beat,' that sounds impossible," he told me years
later, when I asked him about Jobs's accomplishments. "They basically
did that."

Options

AmongJobs's quirks was his attitude toward money. When he returned
to Apple in 1997, he portrayed himself as a person working for $1 a
year, doing it for thebenefit ofthe company rather thanhimself. Nev
ertheless he embraced the idea ofoption megagrants—granting huge
bundles ofoptions tobuy Apple stock at apreset price—that were not
subject to the usual good compensation practices of board committee
reviews and performance criteria.

When he dropped the "interim" in his tide and officially became
CEO, he was offered (in addition to the airplane) a megagrant by Ed
Woolard and the board atthe beginning of2000; defying the image he
cultivated of not being interested in money, he had stunned Woolard
by asking for even more options than the board had proposed. But
soon after he got them, it turned out that it was for naught. Apple
stock cratered in September 2000—due to disappointing sales of the

Cube plus the bursting ofthe Internet bubble—which made the op
tions worthless.

Twenty-first-century Macs

449

Making matters worse was aJune 2001 cover story inFortune about
overcompensated CEOs, "The Great CEO Pay Heist." A mug ofJobs,
smiling smugly, filled the cover. Even though his options were under
waterat the time, the technical method ofvaluing them when granted
(known as a Black-Scholes valuation) settheir worth at $872 million.

Fortune proclaimed it "by far" the largest compensation package ever
granted a CEO. It was the worst of all worlds: Jobs had almost no

money that he could put in his pocket for his four years ofhard and
successful turnaround work at Apple, yet he had become the poster

child ofgreedy CEOs, making him look hypocritical and undermining
his self-image. He wrote a scathing letter to the editor, declaring that
his options actually "are worth zero" and offering to sell them to For
tune for halfofthe supposed $872 million the magazine had reported.
In the meantime Jobs wanted the board to give him another big

grant of options, since his old ones seemed worthless. He insisted,
both to the board and probably to himself, that it was more about
getting proper recognition than getting rich. "Itwasn't so much about
the money," he later said in a deposition in an SEC lawsuit over the
options. "Everybody likes to be recognized byhis peers
I felt that
the boardwasn't really doingthe same with me." He felt that the board
should have come to him offering a new grant, without his having
to suggest it. "I thought I was doing a pretty good job. It would have
made me feel better at the time."

His handpicked board in fact doted on him. So they decided to
give him another huge grant in August 2001, when the stock price
was just under $18. The problem was that he worried abouthis image,
especially after the Fortune article. He did not want to accept the new
grant unless the board canceled his old options at the same time. But
to do sowouldhave adverse accounting implications, because it would
be effectively repricing the old options. That would require taking a
charge against current earnings. The onlyway to avoid this "variable
accounting" problem was to cancel his old options at leastsix months
after his new options were granted. In addition, Jobs started haggling
with the board over how quickly the new options would vest.
It was not until mid-December 2001 that Jobs finally agreed to
take the new options and, braving the optics, wait six months before

450

Walter Isaacson

his old ones were canceled. But by then the stock price (adjusting for a
split) had gone up $3, to about $21. Ifthe strike price ofthe new op
tions was set at that new level, each would have thus been $3 less valu

able. So Apple's legal counsel, Nancy Heinen, looked over the recent
stockprices and helped to choose an October date, whenthe stockwas

$18.30. She also approved aset ofminutes that purported to show that

the board had approved the grant on that date. The backdating was
potentially worth $20 million to Jobs.

Once again Jobs would end up suffering bad publicity without
making apenny. Apple's stock price kept dropping, and byMarch 2003
even the new options were so low that Jobs traded in all of them for
an outright grant of $75 million worth of shares, which amounted to

about $8.3 million for each year he had worked since coming back in
1997 through the end of the vesting in 2006.
None of this would have mattered much if the Wall StreetJournal

had not run a powerful series in 2006 about backdated stock options.
Apple wasn't mentioned, but itsboard appointed a committee of three
members—Al Gore, Eric Schmidt ofGoogle, and Jerry York, formerly
of IBM and Chrysler—to investigate its own practices. "We decided
at the outset thatif Steve was at fault we would let the chips fall where
they may," Gore recalled. Thecommittee uncovered some irregularities
with Jobs's grants and those of other top officers, and it immediately
turned thefindings over to the SEC. Jobs was aware ofthebackdating,
the report said, but he ended up not benefiting financially. (A board
committee at Disney also found that similar backdating had occurred
at PixarwhenJobs was in charge.)
The laws governing such backdating practices were murky, espe
cially since no one at Apple ended up benefiting from the dubiously
dated grants. The SEC took eight months to do its own investiga
tion, and in April 2007 it announced that it would not bring action
against Apple "based in part on its swift, extensive, and extraordinary
cooperation in the Commission's investigation [and its] prompt selfreporting." Although the SEC found that Jobs had been aware of the
backdating, it cleared him of anymisconduct because he "was unaware
of the accounting implications."
The SEC did file complaints against Apple's former chief finan-

Twenty-first-century Macs

451

cialofficer Fred Anderson, who was on the board, and general counsel

Nancy Heinen. Anderson, aretired Air Force captain with asquare jaw
and deep integrity, had been a wise and calming influence at Apple,
where he was known for his ability to control Jobs's tantrums. He was

cited by the SEC only for "negligence" regarding the paperwork for
one set of the grants (not the ones that went to Jobs), and the SEC
allowed him to continue to serve on corporate boards. Nevertheless
he ended up resigning from the Apple board.
Anderson thought he had been made a scapegoat. When he setded with the SEC, his lawyer issued a statement that cast some of the
blame onJobs. It said that Anderson had "cautioned Mr.Jobs that the
executive team grant would have to bepriced on the date of the actual
board agreement or there could be an accounting charge," and that
Jobs replied "that the board hadgiven its prior approval."
Heinen,who initially fought the charges against her, endedup set
tling and paying a $2.2 million fine, without admitting or denying any
wrongdoing. Likewise the company itself settled a shareholders' law
suit by agreeing to pay $14 million in damages.
"Rarely have so many avoidable problems been created by one
man's obsession with his own image," Joe Nocera wrote in the New
York Times. "Then again, this is Steve Jobs we're talking about." Con
temptuous of rules and regulations, he created a climate that made
it hard for someone like Heinen to buck his wishes. At times, great
creativity occurred. But people around him could paya price. On com

pensation issues in particular, the difficulty of defying hiswhims drove
somegood peopleto make some bad mistakes.
The compensation issue in some ways echoed Jobs's parking quirk.
He refused such trappings as having a "Reserved for CEO" spot, but
he assumed for himself the right to park in the handicapped spaces.
He wanted to be seen (both by himself and by others) as someone
willing to work for $1 a year, but he also wanted to have huge stock
grants bestowed upon him. Jangling inside him were the contradic
tions of a counterculture rebel turned business entrepreneur, someone
who wanted to believe that he had turned on and tuned in without

having sold out and cashed in.

CHAPTER

THIRTY-FIVE

ROUND ONE
Memento Mori

Atfifty (in center)\ with Eve andLaurene (behind cake)>Eddy Cue
(by windowjyjohn Lasseter (with camera), andLee Clow (with beard)

Cancer

Jobs would later speculate that his cancer was caused by the grueling
year that he spent, starting in 1997, running both Apple and Pixar. As
he drove back and forth, he had developed kidney stones and other
ailments, and he would come home so exhausted that he could barely
speak. "That's probably when this cancer started growing, because my
immune system was pretty weak at that time," he said.

There is no evidence that exhaustion or a weak immune system
causes cancer. However, his kidney problems did indirectly lead to the
452

Round Two

489

Jobs surprised everyone by making an appearance. He ambled in and
was able to stay for most of the meeting. By earlyJune he was holding
daily meetings at his house, and by the end of the month he was back
at work.

Would he now, after facing death, be more mellow? His colleagues
quickly got an answer. On his first dayback,he startled his top team by
throwing a series of tantrums. He ripped apart people he had not seen
for six months,tore up some marketing plans, and chewed out a couple
of peoplewhosework he found shoddy. But what was truly tellingwas
the pronouncementhe made to a couple of friends late that afternoon.
"I had the greatesttime beingbacktoday," he said. "I can'tbelieve how
creative I'm feeling, and how the whole team is." Tim Cook took it
in stride. "I've neverseen Steve hold backfrom expressing his view or
passion," he later said."But that was good."
Friends noted that Jobs had retained his feistiness. During his recu
peration he signed up for Comcast's high-definition cable service, and
one day he called Brian Roberts, who ran the company. "I thought he
was callingto say something nice about it," Roberts recalled. "Instead,
he told me It sucks.'" But Andy Hertzfeld noticed that, beneath the
gruffness, Jobs had become more honest. "Before, if you asked Steve
for a favor, he might do the exact opposite," Hertzfeld said."That was
the perversity in his nature.Now he actually tries to be helpfiil."
His public return came on September9, when he took the stage at
the company's regular fall music event. He got a standing ovation that
lasted almost a minute, then he opened on an unusually personal note
by mentioning that he was the recipientof a liverdonation. "I wouldn't
be here without such generosity," he said, "so I hope all of us can be
as generous and elect to become organ donors." After a moment of
exultation—"I'm vertical, I'm back at Apple, and I'm loving every day
of it"—he unveiled the new line of iPod Nanos, with video cameras, in
nine different colors of anodized aluminum.

By the beginning of 2010 he had recovered most of his strength,
and he threw himselfback into work for what would be one of his, and

Apple's, most productive years. He had hit two consecutive home runs
sincelaunching Apple's digital hub strategy: the iPod and the iPhone.
Now he was going to swing for another.

CHAPTER

thirty-eight

THE iPAD
Into the Post-PC Era

You Say You Want a Revolution
Back in 2002, Jobs had been annoyed by the Microsoft engineer who
kept proselytizing about the tablet computer software he had devel
oped, which allowed users to input information on the screen with a
stylus or pen. A few manufacturers released tablet PCs that year using
the software, but none made a dent in the universe. Jobs had been

eagerto show how it shouldbe done right—no stylus!—but when he
saw the multi-touch technology that Apple was developing, he had
decided to use it first to make an iPhone.

490

The iPad

491

In the meantime, the tablet idea was percolating within the Mac
intosh hardware group. "We have no plans to make a tablet," Jobs
declared in an interview with Walt Mossberg in May 2003. "It turns
out people want keyboards. Tablets appeal to rich guys with plenty
of other PCs and devices already." Like his statement about having a
"hormone imbalance," that was misleading; at most of his annualTop
100 retreats, the tablet was among the future projects discussed. "We
showed the idea off at manyof these retreats, because Steve neverlost
his desire to do a tablet," Phil Schiller recalled.

The tablet project got a boost in 2007 when Jobs was considering
ideas for a low-cost netbook computer. At an executive team brain
storming session one Monday, Ive asked why it needed a keyboard
hinged to the screen; that was expensive and bulky. Put the keyboard
on the screenusing a multi-touch interface, he suggested. Jobs agreed.
So the resources were directed to revving up the tablet project rather
than designing a netbook.
The process began with Jobs and Ive figuring out the right screen
size. They had twenty models made—all rounded rectangles, of
course—in slightlyvarying sizes and aspect ratios. Ive laid them out
on a table in the designstudio, and in the afternoonthey wouldlift the
velvet cloth hiding them and play with them. "That's how we nailed
what the screen size was," Ive said.

As usual Jobs pushed for the purest possible simplicity. That re
quired determining what was the core essence of the device. The an
swer: the display screen. So the guiding principle was that everything
theydid had to defer to the screen. "Howdo we get out of the way so
there aren't a ton of features and buttons that distract from the dis

play?" Ive asked. At every step, Jobs pushed to remove and simplify.
At one pointJobs looked at the model andwas slightly dissatisfied.
It didn't feel casual and friendly enough, so that you would naturally
scoop it up and whisk it away. Ive put his finger, so to speak, on the
problem: They needed to signal that you could grab it with one hand,
on impulse. The bottom of the edge needed to be slightly rounded,
so that you'd feel comfortable just scooping it up rather than lifting
it carefully. That meant engineering had to design the necessary con-

492

Walter Isaacsoi

nection ports and buttonsin a simple lip that was thin enoughto wash
awaygently underneath.
If you had been paying attention to patent filings, youwouldhave
noticed the one numbered D504889 that Apple applied for in March
2004andwas issued fourteen months later. Amongthe inventors listed
were Jobs and Ive. The application carried sketches of a rectangular
electronic tablet with rounded edges, which looked just the way the
iPad turned out, including one of a man holding it casually in his left
hand while usinghis right index finger to touch the screen.
Since the Macintosh computers
were now using Intel chips, Jobs ini
tially planned to use in the iPad the
low-voltage Atom chip that Intel was
developing. Paul Otellini, Intel's CEO,
waspushing hard to work together on a
design, and Jobs's inclination was to'
trust him. His company was making
the fastest processors in the world. But
Intel wasused to makingprocessors for
machines that plugged into a wall, not
ones that had to preserve battery life.
So Tony Fadell argued strongly for
something based on the ARM architecture, which was simpler and
usedless power. Applehad been an early partnerwith ARM, and chips
usingits architecture were in the original iPhone. Fadellgatheredsup
port from other engineers and proved that it was possible to confront
Jobs and turn him around. "Wrong,wrong, wrong!" Fadell shouted at
one meeting when Jobs insisted it was best to trust Intel to make a
good mobile chip.Fadelleven put hisApplebadgeon the table,threat
ening to resign.
Eventually Jobs relented. "I hear you," he said. "I'm not going

to go against my best guys." In fact he went to the other extreme.
Applelicensed the ARM architecture, but it also bought a 150-person
microprocessor design firm in Palo Alto, called P.A. Semi, and had it
create a custom system-on-a-chip, called the A4, which was based on

The iPad

493

the ARM architecture and manufactured in South Korea by Samsung.
As Jobs recalled:
At the high-performance end, Intel is the best. They build the fastest
chip,if you don't careaboutpowerand cost. But theybuildjust the pro
cessor on one chip, so it takes a lot of other parts. Our A4 has the pro
cessor and the graphics, mobile operating system, and memory control
all in the chip.We tried to help Intel, but they don't listen much.We ve
been telling them for years that their graphics suck. Every quarter we
schedule a meeting with me andourtop threeguys and PaulOtellini.At
the beginning, we were doingwonderful things together. They wanted
this big joint project to do chips for future iPhones. There were two
reasons we didn't go with them. One was that they arejust really slow.
They're like a steamship, not very flexible. We're used to going pretty
fast. Secondis that wejust didn'twant to teach them everything, which
they could go and sell to our competitors.

According to Otellini,it wouldhave madesense for the iPad to use
Intel chips. The problem, he said, was that Apple and Intel couldn't
agree on price.Also, they disagreed on who would control the design.
It was another example ofJobs's desire, indeed compulsion, to control
every aspectof a product,from the silicon to the flesh.

The Launch> January 2010
The usual excitement that Jobswas able to gin up for a productlaunch
paled in comparison to the frenzy that built for the iPad unveiling on
January27,2010, in San Francisco. The Economist put him on its cover
robed, haloed, and holding what was dubbed "the Jesus Tablet." The
Wall StreetJournal struck a similarly exalted note:"The last time there
was this much excitement about a tablet, it had some commandments
written on it."

As if to underscore the historic nature of the launch, Jobs in

vited back many of the old-timers from his early Apple days. More

494

Walter Isaacson

poignantly, James Eason, who had performed his liver transplant the
year before, andJeffrey Norton, who had operated on his pancreas in
2004, were in the audience, sitting with his wife, his son, and Mona
Simpson.
Jobs did his usualmasterly job of putting a new device into context,

as he had done for the iPhone three years earlier. This time he put up
a screen that showed an iPhone and a laptopwith a question mark in
between. "The question is,isthere room forsomething in the middle?"
he asked. That "something" would have to be good at web brows
ing, email, photos, video, music, games, and ebooks. He drove a stake
through the heart of the netbook concept. "Netbooks aren't better at
anything!" he said. The invited guests and employees cheered. "Butwe
have somethingthat is.We callit the iPad."
To underscore the casual nature of the iPad, Jobs ambled over to a
comfortable leatherchairand side table (actually, given his taste,it was
a Le Corbusier chairand an Eero Saarinen table) and scooped one up.
"It's so muchmore intimate than a laptop," he enthused. He proceeded
to surf to the New York Times website, send an email to Scott Forstall

and Phil Schiller ("Wow, we really are announcing the iPad"), flip
through a photo album, use a calendar, zoom in on the Eiffel Tower
on Google Maps, watch some video clips {Star Trek and Pixar's Up),
show off the iBookshelf, and play a song(Bob Dylan's "Likea Rolling
Stone," which he had played at the iPhone launch). "Isn't that awe
some?" he asked.

With his final slide, Jobs emphasized one of the themes of his
life, which was embodied by the iPad: a sign showing the corner of
Technology Street and Liberal Arts Street. "The reason Apple can
create products like the iPad is that we've always tried to be at the in
tersection of technology and liberal arts," he concluded. The iPad was
the digital reincarnation of the Whole Earth Catalog, the place where
creativity met tools for living.
For once, the initialreaction wasnot a Hallelujah Chorus.The iPad
was not yet available (it would go on sale in April), and some who
watched Jobs's demo were not quite sure what it was. An iPhone on
steroids? "I haven't been this let down since Snooki hooked up with
The Situation," wrote NewsweeUs Daniel Lyons (who moonlighted

The iPad

495

as "The Fake SteveJobs" in an online parody). Gizmodo ran a con
tributor's piece headlined "Eight Things That Suck about the iPad"
(no multitasking, no cameras, no Flash ...). Even the name came in
for ridicule in the blogosphere, with snarky comments about feminine
hygiene products and maxi pads. The hashtag "#iTampon" was the
number-three trending topic on Twitter that day.
There was also the requisite dismissal from BillGates."I still think
that some mixture of voice, the pen and a real keyboard—in other
words a netbook—will be the mainstream," he told Brent Schlender.

"So,it's not like I sit there and feel the samewayI did with the iPhone
whereI say, 'Oh my God, Microsoftdidn't aim high enough.'It's a nice
reader, but there's nothing on the iPad I look at and say, 'Oh, I wish
Microsoft had done it.'" He continued to insist that the Microsoft

approachof using a stylus for input wouldprevail. "I'vebeen predicting
a tablet with a stylusfor manyyears," he told me."I will eventuallyturn
out to be right or be dead."
The night after his announcement, Jobs was annoyed and de
pressed. As we gatheredin his kitchenfor dinner, he pacedaround the
table calling up emails and web pages on his iPhone.
I got about eight hundred emailmessages in the last twenty-fourhours.
Most of them are complaining. There's no USB cord! There's no this,
no that. Someof them arelike,"Fuckyou, howcanyou do that?"I don't
usuallywrite peopleback,but I replied, "Your parentswould be so proud
of how you turned out."And somedon't like the iPad name, and on and
on. I kind of got depressed today. It knocks you back a bit.

He did get one congratulatory call that day that he appreciated,
from President Obama's chiefofstaff, Rahm Emanuel. But he noted at

dinner that the president had not calledhim since taking office.

The public carping subsided when the iPadwent on sale in April and
people got their hands on it. Both Time and Newsweek put it on the
cover. "The tough thing about writing about Apple products is that
they come with a lot of hype wrapped around them," Lev Grossman
wrote in Time. "The other tough thing about writing about Apple

496

Walter Isaacson

products is that sometimes the hype is true." His main reservation, a
substantive one, was "thatwhile it's a lovely device for consuming con
tent, it doesn't do muchto facilitate its creation." Computers, especially
the Macintosh, had become tools that allowed people to make music,
videos, websites, and blogs, whichcould be postedfor the world to see.
"The iPad shifts the emphasis from creating content to merely absorb
ing and manipulating it. It mutes you, turns you back into a passive
consumer of other people's masterpieces." It was a criticism Jobs took
to heart. He set about making sure that the next version of the iPad
would emphasize ways to facilitate artistic creation by the user.
NewsweeHs cover linewas "What's So Great aboutthe iPad? Every
thing." Daniel Lyons, who had zapped it with his "Snooki" comment
at the launch, revised his opinion. "Myfirst thought, as I watchedJobs
run through his demo, was that it seemed like no big deal," he wrote.
"It's a bigger version of the iPod Touch, right? Then I got a chance
to use an iPad, and it hit me: I want one." Lyons, like others, realized
that this wasJobs's pet project, and it embodied all that he stood for.
"He has an uncannyability to cookup gadgets that we didn't knowwe
needed, but then suddenly can't live without," he wrote. "Aclosed sys
tem maybe the onlywayto deliver the kind of techno-Zen experience
that Apple has become known for."
Most of the debate over the iPad centered on the issue of whether

its closed end-to-end integration was brilliantor doomed. Googlewas
starting to play a role similar to the one Microsoft had played in the
1980s, offering a mobile platform, Android, that was open and could
be used by all hardware makers. Fortune staged a debate on this issue
in its pages. "There's no excuse to be closed," wrote Michael Copeland. But his colleague Jon Fortt rebutted, "Closed systems get a bad
rap, but they work beautifully and users benefit. Probably no one in
tech has proved this more convincingly than SteveJobs. By bundling
hardware, software, and services, and controlling them tightly, Apple
is consistently able to get the jump on its rivals and roll out polished
products." They agreedthat the iPad would be the clearest test of this
question since the original Macintosh. "Apple has taken its controlfreakrep to a whole new level with the A4 chip that powersthe thing,"

The iPad

497

wrote Fortt. "Cupertino now has absolute say over the silicon, device,
operating system, App Store, and payment system."
Jobs went to the Apple store in Palo Alto shortly before noon
on April 5, the day the iPad went on sale. Daniel Kottke—his aciddropping soul mate from Reed and the early days at Apple, who no
longer harbored a grudge for not getting founders' stock options—
made a point of being there. "It had been fifteen years, and I wanted
to see him again," Kottke recounted. "I grabbed him and told him I
was going to use the iPad for my song lyrics. He was in a great mood
and we had a nice chat after all theseyears." Powell and their youngest
child, Eve, watched from a corner of the store.
Wozniak, who had once beena proponent of making hardware and

software as open as possible, continued to revise that opinion. As he
often did, he stayed up all night withthe enthusiasts waiting in line for
the store to open. This time he was at San Jose's Valley FairMall, rid
ing a Segway. A reporter asked him about theclosed nature ofApple's
ecosystem. "Apple gets you into their playpen andkeeps you there, but
there are some advantages to that," he replied. "I like open systems,
but I'm a hacker. But most people want things that are easy to use.

Steve's genius is that he knows how to make things simple, and that
sometimes requires controlling everything."
The question "What's on your iPad?" replaced "What's on your
iPod?" Even President Obama's staffers, who embraced the iPad as a

markof their tech hipness, played the game. Economic Advisor Larry
Summers had the Bloomberg financial information app, Scrabble,
and The Federalist Papers. Chief of StaffRahm Emanuel had a slew
of newspapers, Communications Advisor Bill Burton had Vanity Fair
and one entire season of the television series Lost, and Political Direc

tor David Axelrod had Major League Baseball and NPR.
Jobs was stirred by a story, which he forwarded to me, by Michael
Noer on Forbes.com. Noer was reading a science fiction novel on his

iPad while staying at a dairy farm in a rural area north of Bogota,
Colombia, when a poor six-year-old boywho cleaned the stables came
up to him. Curious, Noer handed him the device. With no instruc
tion, and never having seen a computer before, the boy started using

498

Walter Isaacson

it intuitively. He began swiping the screen, launching apps, playing a
pinball game. "Steve Jobs has designed a powerful computer that an
illiterate six-year-old can usewithout instruction," Noer wrote."Ifthat
isn't magical, I don't knowwhat is."
In less than a month Apple sold one million iPads. That was twice

as fast as it took the iPhone to reach that mark. By March 2011, nine
months after itsrelease, fifteen million had been sold. By some measures
it became the most successful consumer product launch in history.

Advertising
Jobs was not happy with the original ads for the iPad. As usual, he
threw himself into the marketing, working withJames Vincent and
Duncan Milner at the ad agency (now called TBWA/Media Arts

Lab), with Lee Clow advising from a semiretired perch. The com
mercial they first produced was a gentle scene of a guy in faded jeans
andsweatshirt reclining in a chair, looking at email, a photo album, the
New York Times, books, andvideo onaniPad propped on hislap. There
were nowords, justthebackground beat of"There Goes MyLove" by
the Blue Van. "After he approved it, Steve decided he hated it," Vin
cent recalled. "He thought it looked like a Pottery Barncommercial."
Jobs later told me:

It had been easy to explain what the iPod was—a thousand songs in
your pocket—which allowed usto move quickly to the iconic silhouette
ads. But it was hard to explain what an iPad was. We didn't want to
show it as a computer, and yet we didn't want to make it so soft that it
looked like a cute TV. The first set of ads showed we didn't know what

wewere doing. Theyhada cashmere andHush Puppies feel to them.
James Vincent had not taken a break in months. So when the iPad

finally wenton sale andthe ads started airing, he drove withhisfamily
to the Coachella Music Festival in Palm Springs, whichfeatured some
of his favorite bands, including Muse, Faith No More, and Devo. Soon
after he arrived, Jobs called. "Your commercials suck," he said. "The

The iPad

499

iPad is revolutionizing the world, and we need something big. You've
given me small shit."
"Well, whatdoyou want?" Vincent shot back. "You've notbeen able
to tell me what you want."
"I don't know," Jobs said. "You have to bring me something new.
Nothingyou've shown me is even close."
Vincent argued back and suddenly Jobs went ballistic. "He just
started screaming at me," Vincent recalled. Vincent could be volatile
himself, and the volleys escalated.
When Vincent shouted, "You've got to tell me what you want,"
Jobs shot back, "You've got to show me some stuff, and I'll know it
when I see it."

"Oh, great, let me write that on my brief for my creative people:
I'll know it when I see it."

Vincent got so frustrated that he slammed his fist into the wall of
the house he was renting and put a large dent in it. When he finally
wentoutside to his family, sitting bythe pool, theylooked at him ner
vously. "Are youokay?" hiswife finally asked.
It took Vincent and his team two weeks to come up with an array

of new options, and he asked to present them at Jobs's house rather
than the office, hoping that it would be a more relaxed environment.
Laying storyboards on the coffee table, he and Milner offered twelve
approaches. One was inspirational and stirring. Another tried humor,
with Michael Cera, the comic actor, wandering through a fake house

making funny comments about theway people could use iPads. Others
featured the iPadwith celebrities, or set starkly on a white background,
or starring in a little sitcom, or in a straightforward product demon
stration.

After mulling over the options, Jobs realized what he wanted. Not
humor, nor a celebrity, nor a demo. "It's got to make a statement," he
said. "It needs to be a manifesto. This is big." He had announced that
the iPadwould change the world, and he wanted a campaign that rein
forced that declaration. Other companies wouldcomeout with copycat
tablets in a yearor so, he said, and he wanted people to remember that
the iPad was the real thing. "We need ads that stand up and declare
what we have done."

500

Walter Isaacson

He abruptly got out of his chair, looking a bit weak but smiling.
"I've gotto go have amassage now," he said. "Get to work."
So Vincent and Milner, along with the copywriter Eric Grunbaum, began crafting whatthey dubbed "The Manifesto." It wouldbe
fast-paced, with vibrant pictures and a thumping beat, and it would

proclaim that the iPad was revolutionary. The music they chose was
Karen O's pounding refrain from the Yeah Yeah Yeahs'"Gold Lion."

As the iPad was shown doing magical things, a strong voice declared,
"iPad is thin. iPad is beautiful It's crazy powerful. It's magical
It's video, photos. More books than you could read in a lifetime. It's
already arevolution, and it's only just begun."
Once the Manifesto ads had run their course, the team again tried
something softer, shot as day-in-the-life documentaries by the young
filmmaker Jessica Sanders. Jobs liked them—for a little while. Then

he turned against them for the same reason he had reacted against
the original Pottery Barn-style ads. "Dammit," he shouted, "they look
like aVisa commercial, typical ad agency stuff."
He hadbeen asking for ads that were different and new, but even
tually he realized he did not want to stray from what he considered

the Apple voice. For him, that voice had adistinctive set of qualities:
simple, declarative, clean. "We went down that lifestyle path, and it
seemed to begrowing on Steve, and suddenly he said, 'I hate thatstuff,
it's not Apple,'" recalled Lee Clow. "He told us to get back to the
Apple voice. It's avery simple, honest voice." And so they went back
to a clean white background, with just a close-up showing off all the
things that "iPad is ..." and could do.

Apps
The iPad commercials were not about the device, but about what
you could do with it. Indeed its success came notjust from the beauty
of the hardware but from the applications, known as apps, that al
lowed you to indulge in all sorts of delightful activities. There were
thousands—and soon hundreds of thousands—of apps thatyou could
download for free or for a few dollars. You could sling angry birds with

The iPad

501

the swipe of your finger, track your stocks, watch movies, read books
and magazines, catch up on the news, play games, and waste glorious
amounts of time. Once again the integration of the hardware, soft
ware, and store made it easy. But the apps also allowed the platform
to be sortof open, in a very controlled way, to outside developers who
wanted to createsoftware and content for it—open, that is,like a care

fully curated and gated community garden.
The apps phenomenon began withthe iPhone. When it first came
out in early 2007, there were no apps you could buy from outside de
velopers, andJobs initially resisted allowing them. He didn't want out
siders to create applications for theiPhone thatcould mess it up, infect
it with viruses, or pollute its integrity.
Board member Art Levinson was among those pushing to allow

iPhone apps. "I called him a halfdozen times to lobby for the potential
of the apps," he recalled. If Apple didnt allow them, indeed encour
age them, another smartphone maker would, giving itself a competi
tive advantage. Apple's marketing chiefPhilSchiller agreed. "I couldn't
imagine thatwe would create something as powerful as theiPhone and
not empower developers to make lots of apps," he recalled. "I knew
customers would love them." From the outside, the venture capitalist

John Doerr argued that permitting apps would spawn a profusion of
new entrepreneurs who wouldcreate new services.

Jobs at first quashed the discussion, partly because he felt his team
did not have the bandwidth to figure out all of the complexities that
would be involved in policing third-party app developers. He wanted
focus. "So he didn't want to talk about it," said Schiller. But as soon as

the iPhone was launched, he was willing to hear the debate. "Every
time the conversation happened, Steve seemed a little more open," said
Levinson. There were freewheeling discussions at fourboardmeetings.
Jobs soon figured out that there was a way to have the best of both
worlds. He would permit outsiders to write apps, but theywould have
to meet strict standards, be tested and approved by Apple, and be sold
only through the iTunes Store. It was a way to reap the advantage of
empowering thousands of software developers while retaining enough
control to protect the integrity of the iPhone and the simplicity of the
customer experience. "It was an absolutely magical solution that hit

502

Walter Isaacson

the sweet spot," said Levinson. "It gave us the benefits of openness
while retaining end-to-end control."

TheApp Store for the iPhone opened oniTunes inJuly 2008; the
billionth download came nine months later. Bythe time the iPad went
onsale inApril 2010, there were 185,000 available iPhone apps. Most

could also be used on the iPad, although they didn't take advantage
ofthe bigger screen size. But inless than five months, developers had
written twenty-five thousand new apps that were specifically config
ured for the iPad. By July 2011 there were 500,000 apps for both
devices, and there had been more than fifteen billion downloads of
them.

The App Store created a new industry overnight. In dorm rooms
and garages and at major media companies, entrepreneurs invented
newapps. John Doerr's venture capital firm created an iFund of $200
million to offer equity financing for the best ideas. Magazines and
newspapers that had been giving away their content for free saw one
last chance to put the genie of that dubious business model back into

the bottle. Innovative publishers created new magazines, books, and

learning materials just for the iPad. For example, the high-end pub
lishing house Callaway, which had produced books ranging from Ma
donna's Sex to Miss Spiders Tea Partyydecided to "burn the boats" and
give up print altogether to focus on publishing books as interactive
apps. ByJune 2011 Apple had paid out $2.5 billion to app developers.
The iPad and other app-based digital devices heralded a funda
mental shift in thedigital world. Back in the 1980s, going online usu
ally meant dialing into a service like AOL, CompuServe, or Prodigy
that charged fees for access to a carefully curated walled garden filled
with content plus some exit gates that allowed braver users access to

the Internet at large. The second phase, beginning in the early 1990s,
was the advent ofbrowsers thatallowed everyone to freely surftheIn
ternet using the hypertext transfer protocols of the World Wide Web,

which linked billions ofsites. Search engines arose so thatpeople could
easily find thewebsites they wanted. The release oftheiPad portended
a newmodel. Apps resembled the walled gardens of old. The creators
could charge fees and offer more functions to the users who down

loaded them. But the rise of apps also meant that the openness and

The iPad

503

linked nature of the webwere sacrificed. Apps were not aseasily linked
or searchable. Because the iPad allowed the use of both apps and web

browsing, it was not at war with the web model. But it did offer an
alternative,for both the consumers and the creators of content.

Publishing andJournalism
With the iPod, Jobs had transformed the music business. With the

iPad anditsApp Store, hebegan to transform all media, from publish
ing to journalism to television and movies.
Books were an obvious target, since Amazon's Kindle had shown
there was an appetite for electronic books. So Apple created an iBooks
Store,which soldelectronic books the waythe iTunes Store soldsongs.
There was, however, a slight difference in the business model. For the
iTunes Store,Jobs had insistedthat all songs be sold at one inexpensive

price, initially 99 cents. Amazon's JeffBezos hadtriedto take a similar
approach withebooks, insisting onselling them for at most $9.99. Jobs
came in and offered publishers what he had refused to offer record
companies: They could setany price they wanted for their wares in the
iBooks Store, and Apple would take 30%. Initially that meant prices
were higher than on Amazon. Why would people pay Apple more?
"That won't be the case," Jobs answered, when Walt Mossberg asked

him that question at the iPad launch event. "The price will be the
same." He was right.

The day after the iPad launch, Jobs described to me his thinking
on books:

Amazon screwed it up. It paid the wholesale price for some books, but
started selling them below cost at $9.99. The publishers hated that—
they thought it would trash their ability to sell hardcover books at $28.
So before Apple even got on the scene, some booksellers were starting
to withhold booksfromAmazon. Sowetold the publishers, "We'll go to
the agency model, where you setthe price, andweget our 30%, andyes,
the customer pays a litde more, but that's what you want anyway." But
we also asked for a guarantee that if anybody else is selling the books

504

Walter Isaacson

cheaper than we are, then we can sell them at the lower price too. So
they went toAmazon and said, "You're going to sign anagency contract
or we're not goingto give youthe books."

Jobs acknowledged thathe was trying to have it both ways when it
came to music and books. He had refused to offer the music compa
nies the agency model and allow them to set their own prices. Why?
Because he didn't have to. But with books he did. "We were not the

first people in the books business," he said. "Given the situation that

existed, what was best for us was to do this akido move and end up
with the agency model. Andwe pulled it off."
Right after the iPad launch event,Jobs traveled to New Yorkin Febru
ary 2010 to meet with executives in the journalism business. In two

days he saw Rupert Murdoch, his son James, and the management of
their Wall StreetJournal; Arthur SulzbergerJr. and thetopexecutives at
the New York Times; and executives at Time, Fortune, and other Time

Inc. magazines. "I would love to help quality journalism," he latersaid.

"We can't depend on bloggers for our news. We need real reporting
and editorial oversight more than ever. So I'd love to find away to help
people create digital products where they actually can make money."
Since hehad gotten people to pay for music, he hoped hecould dothe
same for journalism.

Publishers, however, turned out to be leery of his lifeline. It meant
that they would have to give 30% of their revenue to Apple, but that
wasn't the biggest problem. More important, the pubUshers feared
that, under his system, they would no longer have a direct relation
ship with their subscribers; theywouldn't have their emailaddress and
credit card number so they could bill them, communicate with them,
and market new products to them. Instead Apple would own the cus
tomers, bill them, and have their information in its own database. And

because of its privacy policy, Apple would not share this information
unless a customer gave explicit permission to do so.
Jobswas particularly interested in striking a dealwith the NewYork
Times, which he felt was a great newspaper in danger of declining be
cause it had not figured out how to charge for digital content."One of

The iPad

505

my personal projects this year, I've decided, is to try to help—whether
they want itor not—the Times? he told me early in 2010. "I think it's
important to the country for them to figure it out."
During his New York trip, he went to dinner with fifty top Times
executives inthe cellar private dining room atPranna, an Asian restau
rant. (He ordered amango smoothie and aplain vegan pasta, neither of
which was onthe menu.) There heshowed offthe iPad and explained

how important it was to find a modest price point for digital content
that consumers would accept. He drew a chart ofpossible prices and
volume. How many readers would they have if the Times were free?
They already knew the answer to that extreme on the chart, because

they were giving it away for free on the web already and had about
twenty million regular visitors. And ifthey made it really expensive?
They had data on that too; they charged print subscribers more than
$300 ayear and had about amillion of them. "You should go after the
midpoint, which is about ten million digital subscribers," he told them.
"And that means your digital subs should be very cheap and simple,
one click and $5 a month at most."

When one of the Times circulation executives insisted that the

paper needed the email and credit card information for all of its sub
scribers, even ifthey subscribed through the App Store, Jobs said that
Apple would not give it out. That angered the executive. It was un
thinkable, he said, for the Times not to have that information. "Well,
you can ask them for it, but if they won't voluntarily give it to you,
don't blame me,"Jobs said. "Ifyou don't like it,don't use us. I'm not the
one who got you in this jam. You're the ones who've spent the past five

years giving away your paper online and not collecting anyone's credit
card information."

Jobs also met privately with Arthur Sulzberger Jr. "He's a nice guy,
and he's really proud ofhis new building, as he should be," Jobs said
later. "I talked to him about whatI thought he ought to do, but then

nothing happened." It took ayear, but in April 2011 the Times started
charging for its digital edition and selling some subscriptions through
Apple, abiding by the policies that Jobs established. It did, however,
decide to charge approximately four times the $5 monthly charge that
Jobs had suggested.

506

Walter Isaacson

At the Time-Life Building, Times editor Rick Stengel played
host. Jobs liked Stengel, who had assigned atalented team led byJosh
Quittner to make arobust iPad version ofthe magazine each week. But
he was upset to see Andy Serwer ofFortune there. Tearing up, he told
Serwer how angry he still was about Fortunes story two years earlier
revealing details ofhis health and the stock options problems. "You
kicked mewhen I was down," he said.

The bigger problem at Time Inc. was the same as the one at the

Times: The magazine company did not want Apple to own its sub
scribers and prevent itfrom having adirect billing relationship. Time
Inc. wanted to create apps that would direct readers to its own website
in order to buy a subscription. Apple refused. When Time and other

magazines submitted apps that did this, they were denied the right to
be in the App Store.

Jobs tried to negotiate personally with the CEO ofTime Warner,

JeffBewkes, asavvy pragmatist with ano-bullshit charm to him. They
had dealt with each other afew years earlier over video rights for the
iPod Touch; even though Jobs had not been able to convince him to

do a deal involving HBO's exclusive rights to show movies soon after

their release, he admired Bewkes's straight and decisive style. For his
part, Bewkes respectedJobs's ability to be both astrategic thinker and a

master ofthe tiniest details. "Steve can go readily from the overarching
principals into the details," he said.

WhenJobs called Bewkes about making adeal for Time Inc. maga
zines on the iPad, he started off by warning that the print business
"sucks," that "nobody really wants your magazines," and that Apple
was offering agreat opportunity to sell digital subscriptions, but "your
guys don't get it." Bewkes didn't agree with any ofthose premises. He
said he was happy for Apple to sell digital subscriptions for Time Inc.
Apple's 30% take was not the problem. "I'm telling you right now, if
you sell a subfor us,you canhave 30%," Bewkes told him.

"Well, that's more progress than I've made with anybody," Jobs
replied.

"I have only one question," Bewkes continued. "If you sell a
subscription to my magazine, and I give you the 30%, who has the
subscription—you or me?"

The iPad

507

"I can't give away all the subscriber info because ofApple's privacy
policy," Jobs replied.

"Well, then, we have to figure something else out, because I don't

want my whole subscription base to become subscribers ofyours, for
you to then aggregate at the Apple store," said Bewkes. "And the next
thing you'll do, once you have a monopoly, is come back and tell me
that my magazine shouldn't be $4 acopy but instead should be $1. If
someone subscribes to our magazine, we need to know who it is, we
need to be able to create online communities of those people, and we

need the right topitch them directly about renewing."
Jobs had an easier time with Rupert Murdoch, whose News Corp.
owned the Wall StreetJournal New York Post, newspapers around the
world, Fox Studios, and the Fox News Channel. When Jobs met
with Murdoch and his team, they also pressed the case that they
should share ownership of the subscribers that came in through the

App Store. But when Jobs refused, something interesting happened.
Murdoch is not known as apushover, but he knew that he did not have

the leverage on this issue, so he accepted Jobs's terms. "We would pre
fer to own the subscribers, and we pushed for that," recalled Murdoch.
"But Stevewouldn't do a deal on those terms, so I said,'Okay,let's get

onwith it.'We didn't see any reason to mess around. He wasn't going
to bend—and I wouldn't have bent if I were in his position—so I just
saidyes."

Murdoch even launched a digital-only daily newspaper, The Daily,

tailored specifically for the iPad. It would be sold in the App Store, on
the terms dictated byJobs, at99 cents aweek. Murdoch himselftook a
team to Cupertino to show the proposed design. Not surprisingly,Jobs
hated it. "Would you allow our designers to help?" he asked. Murdoch
accepted. "The Apple designers had a crack at it," Murdoch recalled,
"and our folks went back and had another crack, and ten days later we

went back and showed them both, and he actually liked our team's
version better. It stunned us."

The Daily, which was neither tabloidy nor serious, but instead a
rather midmarket product like USA Today, was not very successful. But
it did help create an odd-couple bonding between Jobs and Murdoch.
When Murdoch asked him to speak at his June 2010 News Corp. an-

508

Walter Isaacson

nual management retreat, Jobs made an exception to his rule ofnever
doing such appearances. James Murdoch led him in an after-dinner

interview that lasted almost two hours. "He was very blunt and criti
cal ofwhat newspapers were doing in technology," Murdoch recalled.
"He told us we were going to find ithard to get things right, because
you're in New York, and anyone who's any good at tech works in Sili
con Valley." This did not go down very well with the president ofthe

Wall Street Journal Digital Network, Gordon McLeod, who pushed
back abit. At the end, McLeod came up to Jobs and said, "Thanks, it
was awonderful evening, but you probably just cost me my job." Mur

doch chuckled abit when he described the scene to me. "It ended up
being true," he said. McLeod was outwithin three months.

In return for speaking at the retreat, Jobs got Murdoch to hear him
out on Fox News, which he believed was destructive, harmful to the

nation, and ablot on Murdoch's reputation. "You're blowing it with
Fox News," Jobs told him over dinner. "The axis today is not liberal
and conservative, the axis is constructive-destructive, and you've cast
your lot with the destructive people. Fox has become an incredibly de
structive force in our society. You can be better, and this is going to be
your legacy if you're not careful." Jobs said he thought Murdoch did
not really like how far Fox had gone. "Rupert's abuilder, not atearerdowner," he said. "I've had some meetings with James, and I think he
agrees with me. I can just tell."

Murdoch later said he was used to people like Jobs complaining
about Fox. "He's got sort of aleft-wing view on this," he said. Jobs

asked him to have his folks make areel ofaweek ofSean Hannity
and Glenn Beck shows—he thought that they were more destructive
than Bill O'Reilly—and Murdoch agreed to do so. Jobs later told me

that he was going to ask Jon Stewart's team to put together asimilar
reel for Murdoch to watch. "I'd be happy to see it," Murdoch said, "but
he hasn't sent it to me."

Murdoch and Jobs hitit offwell enough that Murdoch went to his

Palo Alto house for dinner twice more during the next year. Jobs joked
that he had to hide the dinner knives on such occasions, because he
was afraid that his liberal wife was going to eviscerate Murdoch when

The iPad

509

he walked in. For his part, Murdoch was reported to have uttered a

great line about the organic vegan dishes typically served: "Eating din
ner at Steve's is a great experience, as long as you get out before the
local restaurants close." Alas, when I asked Murdoch ifhehad ever said
that, he didn't recall it.

One visit came early in 2011. Murdoch was due to pass through
Palo Alto on February 24, and he texted Jobs to tell him so. He didn't
know it was Jobs's fifty-sixth birthday, and Jobs didn't mention it
when he texted back inviting him to dinner. "Itwas my way ofmak

ing sure Laurene didn't veto the plan," Jobs joked. "It was my birth
day, so she had to let me have Rupert over." Erin and Eve were there,
and Reed jogged over from Stanford near the end ofthe dinner. Jobs
showed off the designs for his planned boat, which Murdoch thought
looked beautiful on the inside but "a bit plain" on the outside. "It cer

tainly shows great optimism about his health that he was talking so
much about building it," Murdoch later said.

At dinner they talked about the importance of infusing an entre

preneurial and nimble culture into acompany. Sony failed to do that,
Murdoch said. Jobs agreed. "Iused tobelieve that areally big company
couldn't have a clear corporate culture," Jobs said. "But I now believe it
can be done. Murdoch's done it. I think I've done it at Apple."
Most of the dinner conversation was about education. Murdoch

had just hired Joel Klein, the former chancellor of the New York
City Department ofEducation, to start a digital curriculum division.
Murdoch recalled thatJobs was somewhat dismissive of the idea that

technology could transform education. ButJobs agreed with Murdoch
that the paper textbook business would be blown away by digital learn
ing materials.

In fact Jobs had his sights set on textbooks as the next business he
wanted to transform. He believed it was an $8 billion a year industry

ripe for digital destruction. He was also struck by the fact that many
schools, for security reasons, don't have lockers, so kids have to lug
a heavy backpack around. "The iPad would solve that," he said. His
idea was to hire great textbook writers to create digital versions, and
make them a feature of the iPad. In addition, he held meetings with

510

Walter Isaacson

the major publishers, such as Pearson Education, about partnering
with Apple. "The process by which states certify textbooks is corrupt,"
he said. "But ifwe can make the textbooks free, and they come with the
iPad, then they don't have to be certified. The crappy economy at the
state level will last for adecade, and we can give them an opportunity
to circumvent that whole process and save money."

CHAPTER THIRTY-NINE

NEW BATTLES
And Echoes of Old Ones

Google: Open versus Closed
A few days after he unveiled the iPad in January 2010, Jobs held a
"town hall" meeting with employees atApple's campus. Instead ofex
ulting about their transformative new product, however, he went into a
rant against Google for producing the rival Android operating system.
Jobs was furious that Google had decided to compete with Apple in
the phone business. "We did not enter the search business," he said.
"They entered the phone business. Make no mistake. They want to
kill the iPhone. We won't let them." A few minutes later, after the

meeting moved on to another topic, Jobs returned to his tirade to at
tack Google's famous values slogan. "I want to go back to that other
question first and say one more thing. This 'Don't be evil' mantra, it's
bullshit."

Jobs felt personally betrayed. Google's CEO Eric Schmidt had
been on the Apple board during the development of the iPhone
and iPad, and Google's founders, Larry Page and Sergey Brin, had
treated him as a mentor. He felt ripped off. Android's touchscreen

interface was adopting more and more of the features—multi-touch,
swiping, a grid ofapp icons—that Apple had created.
511

^12

Walter Isaacson

Jobs had tried to dissuade Google from developing Android.
He had gone to Google's headquarters near Palo Alto in 2008 and
gotten into a shouting match with Page, Brin, and the head of the
Android development team, Andy Rubin. (Because Schmidt was
then on the Apple board, he recused himself from discussions involv

ing the iPhone.) "I said we would, ifwe had good relations, guarantee
Google access to the iPhone and guarantee it one or two icons on

the home screen," he recalled. But he also threatened that if Google
continued to develop Android and used any iPhone features, such as

multi-touch, he would sue. At first Google avoided copying certain
features, but in January 2010 HTC introduced an Android phone that
boasted multi-touch and many other aspects ofthe iPhone's look and

feel. That was the context for Jobs's pronouncement that Google's
"Don'tbe evil" slogan was "bullshit."

So Apple filed suit against HTC (and, by extension, Android),
alleging infringement of twenty of its patents. Among them were
patents covering various multi-touch gestures, swipe to open, doubletap to zoom, pinch and expand, and the sensors that determined how
a device was beingheld. As he sat in his house in Palo Alto the week

the lawsuit was filed, he became angrier than I had ever seen him:
Our lawsuit is saying, "Google, you fucking ripped off the iPhone,
wholesale ripped us off" Grand theft. I will spend my last dying breath
ifI need to, and I will spend every penny ofApple's $40 billion inthe
bank, to right this wrong. I'm going to destroy Android, because its a
stolen product. I'm willing to go to thermonuclear war on this. They are
scared to death, because they know they are guilty. Outside of Search,
Google's products—Android, Google Docs—are shit.

A few days after this rant, Jobs got a call from Schmidt, who had

resigned from the Apple board the previous summer. He suggested
they get together for coffee, and they met at acafe in aPalo Alto shop
ping center. "We spent half the time talking about personal matters,

then half the time on his perception that Google had stolen Apple's
user interface designs," recalled Schmidt. When it came to the lat

ter subject, Jobs did most ofthe talking. Google had ripped him off,

New Battles

513

he said in colorful language. "We've got you red-handed," he told
Schmidt. "I'm not interested in settling. I don't want your money. If

you offer me $5 billion, I won't want it. I've got plenty ofmoney. I
want you to stop using our ideas in Android, that's all I want." They
resolved nothing.

Underlying the dispute was an even more fundamental issue, one
that had unnerving historical resonance. Google presented Android

as an "open" platform; its open-source code was freely available for
multiple hardware makers to use on whatever phones or tablets they
built. Jobs, ofcourse, had a dogmatic belief that Apple should closely
integrate its operating systems with its hardware. In the 1980s Apple
had not licensed out its Macintosh operating system, and Microsoft
eventually gained dominant market share by licensing its system to

multiple hardware makers and, in Jobs's mind, ripping off Apple's
interface.

The comparison between what Microsoft wrought in the 1980s
and what Google was trying to do in 2010 was not exact, but it was
close enough to be unsettling—and infuriating. It exemplified the

great debate ofthe digital age: closed versus open, or as Jobs framed
it, integrated versus fragmented. Was it better, as Apple believed and
as Jobs's own controlling perfectionism almost compelled, to tie the
hardware and software andcontent handling into one tidysystem that

assured a simple user experience? Or was it better to give users and
manufacturers more choice and free up avenues for more innovation,

by creating software systems that could be modified and used on dif
ferent devices? "Steve has a particular way thathewants to run Apple,
and it's the same as it was twenty years ago, which is that Apple is a
brilliant innovator of closed systems," Schmidt later told me. "They

don't want people to be on their platform without permission. The
benefits ofaclosed platform is control. But Google has a specific belief

that open is the better approach, because it leads to more options and
competition andconsumer choice."
So what did Bill Gates think as he watched Jobs, with his closed

strategy, go into battle against Google, as he had done against Micro
soft twenty-five years earlier? "There are some benefits to being more
closed, in terms ofhow much you control the experience, andcertainly

514

Walter Isaacson

at times he's had the benefit ofthat," Gates told me. But refusing to
license the Apple iOS, he added, gave competitors like Android the
chance to gain greater volume. In addition, he argued, competition
among a variety of devices and manufacturers leads to greater con
sumer choice and more innovation. "These companies are not all

building pyramids next to Central Park," he said, poking fun at Apple's
Fifth Avenue store, "but they are coming up with innovations based on
competing for consumers." Most of the improvements in PCs, Gates
pointed out, came because consumers had a lot of choices, and that

would someday be the case in the world ofmobile devices. "Eventually,
I think, open will succeed, but that's where I come from. In the long
run, the coherence thing, you can't stay with that."
Jobs believed in "the coherence thing." His faith in a controlled

and closed environment remained unwavering, even as Android gained
market share. "Google says we exert more control than they do, that we
are closed and theyare open," he railed when I told himwhatSchmidt
had said. "Well, look at the results—Android's a mess. It has differ

ent screen sizes and versions, over a hundred permutations." Even

if Google's approach might eventually win in the marketplace, Jobs
found it repellent. "I like being responsible for the whole user experi
ence. We do it not to make money. We do it because wewant to make
great products, not crap like Android."

Flash, the App Store, andControl
Jobs's insistence on end-to-end control was manifested in otherbattles

as well. At the town hall meeting where he attacked Google, he also
assailed Adobe's multimedia platform for websites, Flash, as a"buggy"
battery hog made by "lazy" people. The iPod and iPhone, he said,
would never run Flash. "Flash is aspaghetti-ball piece oftechnology
that has lousy performance and really bad security problems," he said
to me later that week.

He even banned apps that made use ofacompiler created byAdobe
that translated Flash code so that itwould be compatible with Apple's
iOS. Jobs disdained the use of compilers that allowed developers to

New Battles

515

write their products once and have them ported to multiple operating

systems. "Allowing Flash to be ported across platforms means things
get dumbed down to the lowest common denominator," he said. "We
spend lots ofeffort to make our platform better, and the developer
doesn't get any benefit ifAdobe only works with functions that every
platform has. So we said that we want developers to take advantage
of our better features, so that their apps work better on our platform

than they work on anybody else's." On that he was right. Losing the
ability to differentiate Apple's platforms—allowing them to become
commoditized like HP and Dell machines—would have meant death
for the company.

There was, inaddition, a more personal reason. Apple had invested
in Adobe in 1985, and together the two companies had launched the

desktop publishing revolution. "I helped put Adobe on the map," Jobs
claimed. In 1999, after he returned to Apple, he had asked Adobe to

start making its video editing software and other products for the iMac
and its new operating system, but Adobe refused. It focused on mak
ing its products for Windows. Soon after, its founder, John Warnock,
retired. "The soul ofAdobe disappeared when Warnock left,"Jobs said.
"Hewas theinventor, theperson I related to. It'sbeen a bunch ofsuits
since then, and the company has turned out crap."
When Adobe evangelists and various Flash supporters in the

blogosphere attacked Jobs for being too controlling, he decided to
write and post an open letter. Bill Campbell, his friend and board
member, came by his house to go over it. "Does it sound like I'm just
trying tostick it toAdobe?" he asked Campbell. "No, it's facts, just put
it out there," the coach said. Most of the letterfocused on the techni

cal drawbacks ofFlash. But despite Campbell's coaching, Jobs couldn't
resist venting at the end about the problematic history between the
two companies. "Adobe was the last major third party developer to
fully adoptMac OS X," he noted.

Apple ended up lifting some ofits restrictions on cross-platform
compilers later in the year, and Adobe was able to come out with a
Flash authoring tool thattook advantage ofthe key features ofApple's
iOS. It was a bitter war, but one in which Jobs had the better argu

ment. In the end it pushed Adobe and other developers of compilers

516

Walter Isaacson

to make better use of the iPhone and iPad interface and its special
features.

Jobs had a tougher time navigating the controversies over Apple's
desire to keep tight control over which apps could be downloaded onto
the iPhone and iPad. Guarding against apps that contained viruses or
violated the user's privacy made sense; preventing apps that took users

to other websites to buy subscriptions, rather than doing it through
the iTunes Store, at least had a business rationale. But Jobs and his

team went further: They decided to ban any app that defamed people,
might be politically explosive, or was deemed by Apple's censors to be
pornographic.

The problem ofplaying nanny became apparent when Apple re
jected an app featuring the animated political cartoons ofMark Fiore,

on the rationale that his attacks on the Bush administration's policy
on torture violated the restriction against defamation. Its decision be
came public, and was subjected to ridicule, when Fiore won the 2010

Pulitzer Prize for editorial cartooning in April. Apple had to reverse

itself, and Jobs made a public apology. "We're guilty ofmaking mis
takes," he said. "We're doing the best we can, we're learning as fast as
we can—but we thought this rulemade sense."

Itwas more than amistake. It raised the specter ofApple's control
lingwhat apps we got to see and read, at least if we wanted to use an

iPad or iPhone. Jobs seemed in danger ofbecoming the Orwellian
Big Brother he had gleefully destroyed in Apple's "1984" Macintosh
ad. He took the issue seriously. One day hecalled the New York Times
columnistTom Friedman to discuss how to draw lines without looking
like a censor. He asked Friedman to head an advisory group to help
come upwith guidelines, butthecolumnist's publisher said it would be
a conflict of interest, and no such committee was formed.

The pornography ban also caused problems. "We believe we have a
moral responsibility to keep porn offthe iPhone," Jobs declared in an
email to a customer. "Folks who want porn can buy an Android."
This prompted an email exchange with Ryan Tate, the editor ofthe
tech gossip site Valleywag. Sipping astinger cocktail one evening, Tate
shot offan email toJobs decrying Apple's heavy-handed control over

New Battles

517

which apps passed muster. "If Dylan was 20 today, how would he feel
about your company?" Tate asked. "Would he think the iPad had the
faintest thing to do with 'revolution'? Revolutions are about freedom."
To Tate's surprise, Jobs responded afew hours later, after midnight.
"Yep," he said, "freedom from programs that steal your private data.
Freedom from programs that trash your battery. Freedom from porn.

Yep, freedom. The times they are achangin', and some traditional PC
folks feel like theirworld is slipping away. It is."

In his reply, Tate offered some thoughts on Flash and other topics,
then returned to the censorship issue. "And you know what? I don't
want freedom from porn.' Porn is just fine! And I think my wife would
agree."

"You might care more about porn when you have kids," replied
Jobs. "It's not about freedom, it's about Apple trying to do the right
thing for its users." At the end he added a zinger: "By the way, what
have you done that's so great? Do you create anything, or just criticize
others' work and belittle their motivations?"

Tate admitted to being impressed. "Rare is the CEOwho will spar
one-on-one with customers and bloggers like this," he wrote. "Jobs
deserves big credit for breaking the mold ofthe typical American ex
ecutive, and notjustbecause his company makes such hugely superior

products:Jobs not only built and then rebuilt his company around some
very strong opinions about digital life, but he's willing to defend them
inpublic. Vigorously. Bluntly. At two in the morning on aweekend."
Many in the blogosphere agreed, and they sentJobs emails praising his
feistiness. Jobs was proud as well; he forwarded his exchange with Tate
and some of the kudos to me.

Still, there was something unnerving about Apple's decreeing

that those who bought their products shouldn't look at controversial
political cartoons or, for that matter, porn. The humor site eSarcasm
.com launched a "Yes, Steve, I want porn" web campaign. "We are

dirty, sex-obsessed miscreants who need access to smut 24 hours aday,"
the site declared. "Either that, or we just enjoy the idea of an uncen-

sored, open society where atechno-dictator doesn't decide what we can
and cannot see."

518

Walter Isaacson

At the time Jobs and Apple were engaged in abattle with Valleywag's
affiliated website, Gizmodo, which had gotten hold ofatest version of
the unreleased iPhone 4that ahapless Apple engineer had left in abar.
When the police, responding to Apple's complaint, raided the house
ofthe reporter, it raised the question ofwhether control freakiness had
combined with arrogance.

Jon Stewart was afriend ofJobs and an Apple fan. Jobs had visited
him privately in February when he took his trip to New York to meet

with media executives. But that didn't stop Stewart from going after
him on The Daily Show. "It wasn't supposed to be this way! Microsoft
was supposed to be the evil one!" Stewart said, only half-jokingly. Be
hind him, the word "appholes" appeared on the screen. "You guys were
the rebels, man, the underdogs. But now, are you becoming The Man?
Remember back in 1984, you had those awesome ads about overthrow
ing Big Brother? Look in the mirror, man!"

By late spring the issue was being discussed among board mem
bers. "There is an arrogance," Art Levinson told me over lunch just
after he had raised it ata meeting. "It ties into Steve's personality. He
can react viscerally and lay out his convictions in a forceful manner."

Such arrogance was fine when Apple was the feisty underdog. But now
Apple was dominant in the mobile market. "We need to make the

transition to being a big company and dealing with the hubris issue,"
said Levinson. Al Gore also talked about the problem at board meet
ings. "The context for Apple is changing dramatically," he recounted.

"It's not hammer-thrower against Big Brother. Now Apple's big, and
people see it as arrogant." Jobs became defensive when the topic was
raised. "He's still adjusting to it," said Gore. "He's better at being the
underdog thanbeing a humble giant."

Jobs had little patience for such talk. The reason Apple was being
criticized, he told me then, was that "companies like Google and
Adobe are lying about us and trying to tear us down." What did he
think ofthe suggestion that Apple sometimes acted arrogantly? "I'm
notworried about that," he said, "because we're notarrogant."

New Battles

519

Antennagate: Design versus Engineering
Inmany consumer product companies, there's tension between the de
signers, who want to make aproduct look beautiful, and the engineers,
who need to make sure it fulfills itsfunctional requirements. At Apple,

where Jobs pushed both design and engineering to the edge, that ten
sion was even greater.

When he and design director Jony Ive became creative coconspira
tors back in 1997, they tended toview the qualms expressed by engi
neers as evidence of a can't-do attitude that needed to be overcome.

Their faith thatawesome design could force superhuman feats ofengi

neering was reinforced by the success ofthe iMac and iPod. When en
gineers said something couldn't be done, Ive and Jobs pushed them to
try, and usually they succeeded. There were occasional small problems.
The iPod Nano, for example, was prone to getting scratched because
Ive believed that a clear coating would lessen the purity of his design.
But that was not a crisis.

When it came todesigning the iPhone, Ive's design desires bumped
into a fundamental law ofphysics that could not be changed even by a
reality distortion field. Metal is not agreat material to put near an an
tenna. As Michael Faraday showed, electromagnetic waves flow around
the surface of metal, not through it. So a metal enclosure around a

phone can create what is known as aFaraday cage, diminishing the sig
nals that get inor out. The original iPhone started with a plastic band
at the bottom, but Ive thought thatwould wreck the design integrity
and askedthat there be an aluminum rim all around. After that ended

up working out, Ive designed the iPhone 4with asteel rim. The steel
would be the structural support, look really sleek, and serve as part of
the phone's antenna.

There were significant challenges. In order to serve as an antenna,
the steel rim had to have a tiny gap. But if a person covered that gap

with a finger orsweaty palm, there could be some signal loss. The en
gineers suggested a clear coating over the metal to help prevent this,
but again Ive felt that this would detract from the brushed-metal look.
The issue was presented toJobs at various meetings, but he thought

520

Walter Isaacson

the engineers were crying wolf. You can make this work, he said. And
so they did.

And itworked, almost perfectly. But not totally perfectly. When the
iPhone 4was released in June 2010, itlooked awesome, but aproblem
soon became evident: Ifyou held the phone a certain way, especially
using your left hand so your palm covered the tiny gap, you could lose
your connection. It occurred with perhaps one in a hundred calls. Be

cause Jobs insisted on keeping his unreleased products secret (even the
phone that Gizmodo scored in a bar had a fake case around it), the
iPhone 4 did not go through the live testing that most electronic de

vices get. So the flaw was not caught before the massive rush to buy
itbegan. "The question is whether the twin policies ofputting design
in front ofengineering and having apolicy ofsupersecrecy surround
ing unreleased products helped Apple," Tony Fadell said later. "On the

whole, yes, but unchecked power is abad thing, and that's what hap
pened."

Had it not been the Apple iPhone 4, aproduct that had everyone
transfixed, the issue ofa few extra dropped calls would not have made
news. But it became known as "Antennagate," and it boiled toahead in
earlyJuly, when ConsumerReports did some rigorous tests and said that

itcould not recommend the iPhone 4because ofthe antenna problem.
Jobs was in Kona Village, Hawaii, with his family when the issue
arose. At first he was defensive. Art Levinsonwas in constant contact

by phone, and Jobs insisted that the problem stemmed from Google
and Motorola making mischief. "They want to shoot Apple down,"
he said.

Levinson urged a little humility. "Let's try to figure out if there's
something wrong," he said. When he again mentioned the perception
that Apple was arrogant, Jobs didn't like it. It went against his blackwhite, right-wrong way ofviewing the world. Apple was a company
ofprinciple, hefelt. If others failed to see that, it was their fault, not a
reason for Apple to play humble.

Jobs's second reaction was to be hurt. He took the criticism person
ally and became emotionally anguished. "At his core, he doesn't do

things that he thinks are blatantly wrong, like some pure pragmatists
in our business," Levinson said. "So if he feels he's right, he will just

New Battles

521

charge ahead rather than question himself." Levinson urged him not
to get depressed. ButJobs did. "Fuck this, it's not worth it," he told
Levinson. Finally Tim Cook was able to shake him out of his leth
argy. He quoted someone as saying that Apple was becoming the new
Microsoft, complacent and arrogant. The next day Jobs changed his
attitude."Let's get to the bottom of this," he said.
When the data about dropped calls were assembled from AT&T,
Jobs realized therewas a problem, even if it was more minorthan peo

ple were making it seem. So he flew back from Hawaii. But before
he left, he made some phone calls. It was time to gather a couple of
trusted old hands, wise men who had been with him during the origi
nal Macintosh days thirty years earlier.
His first callwas to Regis McKenna, the public relations guru."I'm

coming backfrom Hawaii to deal with this antenna thing, and I need
to bounce somestuffoffof you," Jobs told him.They agreed to meet at
the Cupertino boardroom at 1:30the next afternoon. The second call
was to the adman Lee Clow. He had tried to retirefrom the Apple ac
count, but Jobs liked having him around. His colleague James Vincent
was summoned as well.

Jobs also decided to bring his son Reed, then a high school senior,
back with him from Hawaii. "I'm going to be in meetings 24/7 for
probably two days and I want you to be in every single one because
you'll learn more in those two days than you would in two years at
business school," he told him. "You're going to be in the room with
the best people in the world making really tough decisions and get
to see how the sausage is made."Jobs got a little misty-eyed when he
recalled the experience. "I would go through that all againjust for that
opportunity to have him see me at work," he said. "He got to see what
his dad does."

They were joined by Katie Cotton, the steady public relations
chief at Apple, and seven other top executives. The meeting lasted all
afternoon. "It was one of the greatest meetings of my life," Jobs later
said. He began by laying out all the data they had gathered. "Here are
the facts. So what should we do about it?"

McKenna was the most calm and straightforward. "Just lay out the
truth, the data," he said. "Don't appear arrogant, but appear firm and

522

Walter Isaacson

confident." Others, including Vincent, pushed Jobs to be more apolo
getic, but McKenna said no. "Don't go into the press conference with
your tail between your legs," he advised. "You should just say: Thones
aren't perfect, and we're not perfect. We're human and doing the best
we can, and here's the data.'" That became the strategy. When the
topic turned to the perception of arrogance, McKenna urged him not
to worry too much. "I don't think it would work to try to make Steve
look humble," McKenna explained later. "As Steve says about himself,
'What yousee is whatyou get.'"
At thepress event thatFriday, held inApple's auditorium, Jobs fol
lowed McKenna's advice. He did not grovel or apologize, yet he was
able to defuse the problem by showing that Apple understood it and
would tryto make it right. Then he changed the framework of the dis
cussion, saying that all cell phones had some problems. Later he told
me that he had sounded a bit "too annoyed" at the event, but in fact
he was able to strike a tone that was unemotional and straightforward.
He captured it in four short, declarative sentences: "We're not perfect.
Phones are not perfect. We all know that. But we want to make our
users happy."
If anyone was unhappy, he said, they could return the phone (the
return rate turned out to be 1.7%, less than a third ofthe return rate for

the iPhone3GS or mostotherphones) or get a free bumpercase from
Apple. He went on to report data showing that other mobile phones
had similar problems. That was not totally true. Apple's antenna de
sign made it slightly worse than most other phones, including earlier
versions of the iPhone. But it was true that the media frenzy over the
iPhone 4's dropped calls was overblown. "This is blown so out of pro
portion that it's incredible," he said. Instead of being appalled that he
didn't grovel or order a recall, most customers realized that he was
right.
The wait list for the phone,which was already sold out, went from
two weeks to three. It remained the company's fastest-selling product
ever. The media debate shiftedto the issue of whetherJobs was right
to assertthat other smartphones had the sameantenna problems. Even
if the answer was no, that was a better story to face than one about
whether the iPhone 4 was a defective dud.

New Battles

523

Some media observers were incredulous. "In a bravura demonstra

tion of stonewalling, righteousness, and hurt sincerity, Steve Jobs suc
cessfully took to the stage the other day to deny the problem, dismiss
the criticism, and spread the blame among other smartphone makers,"
MichaelWolfifofnewser.com wrote. "This is a level ofmodern market

ing, corporate spin, and crisis management about which you can only
ask with stupefied incredulity and awe: How do they get away with
it? Or, more accurately, how does he get away with it?" Wolff attrib
uted it to Jobs's mesmerizing effect as"the lastcharismatic individual."
Other CEOs would be offering abject apologies and swallowing mas
sive recalls, but Jobs didn't have to. "The grim, skeletal appearance, the
absolutism, the ecclesiastical bearing, the sense of his relationship with
the sacred, reallyworks, and, in this instance, allows him the privilege
of magisterially decidingwhat is meaningful and what is trivial."
Scott Adams, the creator of the cartoon strip Dilbert, was also in
credulous, but far more admiring. He wrote a blog entry a few days
later (which Jobs proudly emailed around) that marveled at howJobs's
"high ground maneuver" was destined to be studied as a new public
relations standard. "Apple's response to the iPhone 4 problem didn't
follow the public relations playbook, because Jobs decided to rewrite
the playbook," Adams wrote."If you want to knowwhat genius looks
like, studyJobs' words." By proclaiming up front that phones are not
perfect,Jobs changed the context of the argument with an indisputable
assertion. "If Jobs had not changed the contextfrom the iPhone 4 to
all smartphones in general, I could make you a hilarious comic strip
about a product so poorly made that it won't work if it comes in con
tact with a human hand. But as soon as the context is changed to 'all
smartphones haveproblems,' the humor opportunity is gone. Nothing
kills humor like a general and boring truth."

Here Comes the Sun

There were a few things that needed to be resolved for the career of
Steve Jobs to be complete. Among them was an end to the Thirty
Years' War with the band he loved, the Beatles. In 2007 Apple had

524

Walter Isaacson

settled its trademark battle with Apple Corps, the holding company
of the Beatles, which had first sued the fledgling computer company
over use of the name in 1978. But that still did not get the Beatles
into the iTunes Store. The band was the last major holdout, primarily
because it had not resolvedwith EMI music, which owned most of its

songs, howto handle the digital rights.
Bythe summer of2010 theBeatles and EMI hadsorted things out,
and a four-person summit was held in the boardroom in Cupertino.
Jobs andhis vice president for theiTunes Store, EddyCue, played host
to JeffJones, who managed the Beatles' interests, and Roger Faxon,
the chiefof EMI music. Now that the Beatles were ready to go digital,
what could Apple offer to make that milestone special? Jobs had been
anticipating this day for a long time. In fact he and his advertising
team, Lee Clow and James Vincent, had mocked up some ads and
commercials three years earlier when strategizing on how to lure the
Beatles on board.

"Steve andI thought about all thethings thatwecould possibly do,"
Cue recalled. That included taking over the front page of the iTunes
Store, buying billboards featuring the best photographs of the band,
andrunning a series oftelevision ads in classic Apple style. The topper
was offering a $149 box set that included all thirteen Beatles studio

albums, the two-volume "Past Masters" collection, and a nostalgiainducing video of the 1964Washington Coliseum concert.
Once they reached an agreement in principle, Jobs personally
helped choose the photographs for the ads. Each commercial ended
with a still black-and-white shot of Paul McCartney and John Lennon,young and smiling, in a recording studio looking down at a piece
of music. It evoked the oldphotographs ofJobs andWozniak looking
at an Apple circuitboard."Getting the Beatles on iTunes was the cul
mination of whywe got into the music business," said Cue.

CHAPTER

FORTY

TO INFINITY
The Cloud, the Spaceship, and Beyond

The iPad2

Even before the iPad went on sale, Jobs was thinking about what
should be in the iPad 2. It needed front and back cameras—everyone
knew that was coming—and he definitelywanted it to be thinner. But
therewasa peripheral issue that he focused on that most people hadn't
thought about: The cases that people used covered the beautiful lines
of the iPad and detracted from the screen. They made fatter what
should be thinner. They put a pedestrian cloak on a device that should
be magical in allofits aspects.
Around that time he read an article about magnets, cut it out,
and handed it to Jony Ive. The magnets had a cone of attraction that
could be precisely focused. Perhaps they could be used to align a de
tachable cover. That way, it could snap onto the front of an iPad but
not have to engulf the entire device. One of the guys in Ive's group
worked out how to make a detachable cover that could connect with a

magnetic hinge. When you began to open it, the screen would pop to
life like the face of a tickled baby, and then the cover could fold into
a stand.

It was not high-tech; it was purelymechanical. But it was enchant525

526

Walter Isaacson

ing. It also was another example of Jobs's desire for end-to-end inte

gration: The cover and theiPad had been designed together so that the
magnets and hinge all connected seamlessly. The iPad 2 would have
many improvements, but this cheeky little cover, which most other
CEOs would never have bothered with, was the one that would elicit
the most smiles.

Because Jobs was on another medical leave, he was not expected to
be at the launch of the iPad 2, scheduled for March 2, 2011, in San
Francisco. But when the invitations were sent out, he told me that I

should try to be there. It was the usual scene: top Apple executives in
the front row, Tim Cook eating energy bars, and the sound system
blaring the appropriate Beatles songs, building up to "You Say You
Want a Revolution" and "Here Comes the Sun." Reed Jobs arrived at

the last minutewith two ratherwide-eyed freshman dorm mates.
"We've been working on this product for a while, and I just didn't
want to miss today," Jobs said as he ambled onstage looking scarily
gaunt but with a jauntysmile. The crowd erupted in whoops, hollers,
and a standing ovation.
He began his demo of the iPad 2 by showing off the new cover.
"This time, the case and the product were designed together," he ex
plained. Then he moved on to address a criticism that had been ran
klinghim because it had some merit: The original iPad had been better
at consuming contentthan at creating it. SoApple had adapted its two
bestcreative applications forthe Macintosh, GarageBand and iMovie,
and made powerful versions available for the iPad. Jobs showed how
easy it was to compose and orchestrate a song, or put music and special
effects into your home videos, and post or share such creations using
the new iPad.

Once again he ended his presentation with the slide showing the
intersection of Liberal Arts Street and Technology Street. And this
time he gave one of the clearest expressions of his credo, that true
creativity and simplicity come from integrating the whole widget—
hardware and software, and for that matter content and covers and

salesclerks—rather than allowing things to be open and fragmented, as
happenedin the worldofWindows PCs and was nowhappeningwith
Android devices:

Notes

597

CHAPTER 38: THE iPAD

You Say You Want aRevolution: Interviews with Steve Jobs, PhU SchiUer,
Tim Cook, Jony Ive, Tony FadeU, Paul OteUini. AU Things Digital conference,
May 30,2003.

The Launch,January 2010: Interviews with Steve Jobs, Daniel Kottke. Brent
Schlender, "BiU Gates Joins theiPad Army of Critics," bnet.com, Feb. 10,2010;

Steve Jobs, keynote address in San Francisco, Jan. 27, 2010; Nick Summers,
"Instant Apple iPad Reaction," Newsweek.com, Jan. 27, 2010; Adam Frucci,
"Eight Things That Suck about the iPad" Gizmodo, Jan. 27,2010; Lev Gross
man, "Do We Need the iPad?" Time, Apr. 1,2010; Daniel Lyons, "Think ReaUy
Different," Newsweek, Mar. 26,2010; Techmate debate, Fortune, Apr. 12,2010;

Eric Laningan, "Wozniak on the iPad" TwiT TV, Apr. 5,2010; Michael Shear,
"AtWhite House, aNewQuestion: What's onYour iPad?" Washington Post, June
7,2010; Michael Noer, "The Stable Boy and theiPad," Forbes.com, Sept. 8,2010.

Advertising: Interviews with Steve Jobs, James Vincent, Lee Clow.
Apps: Interviews with ArtLevinson, PhU SchiUer, Steve Jobs, John Doerr.
Publishing andJournalism: Interviews with Steve Jobs, Jeff Bewkes, Rick
Stengel, Andy Serwer, Josh Quittner, Rupert Murdoch. Ken Auletta, "PubUsh
or Perish," New Yorker, Apr. 26,2010; Ryan Tate, "The Price of Crossing Steve
Jobs," Gawker, Sept. 30,2010.

